Systems biology 13CFLUX2—high-performance software suite for 13 C-metabolic flux analysis 13 C-based metabolic flux analysis (13 C-MFA) is the state-of-the-art method to quantitatively determine in vivo metabolic reaction rates in microorganisms. 13CFLUX2 contains all tools for composing flexible computational 13 C-MFA workflows to design and evaluate carbon labeling experiments. A specially developed XML language, FluxML, highly efficient data structures and simulation algorithms achieve a maximum of performance and effectiveness. Support of multicore CPUs, as well as compute clusters, enables scalable investigations. 13CFLUX2 outperforms existing tools in terms of universality, flexibility and built-in features. Therewith, 13CFLUX2 paves the way for next-generation high-resolution 13Metabolic flux analysis with carbon labeling experiments ( 13 C-MFA) matured as the state-of-the-art technique to infer directly immeasurable in vivo central metabolic reaction rates, the fluxome, by rigorous mathematical modeling . Progress in measurement techniques and scaled-down experimentation has raised the experimental throughput and coverage to which isotope-labeled tracers in the metabolism are quantified . This has encouraged the usage of 13 C-MFA for cell-wide analyses of complex cells such as eukaryotes, mammalian cells or fungi . Such applications drastically increase the computational burden and cannot be adequately treated with existing all-purpose software. Built on experiences made with its successful predecessor 13CFLUX, the high-performance software suite 13CFLUX2 is designed to overcome computational and modeling limitations to increase the flexibility and scope of 13 C-MFA. Major unique features of 13CFLUX2 are (i) tailor-made algorithms in combination with a novel code generation approach leading to highly efficient machine code, (ii) the XML-based document format FluxML to specify ultimate universal models and all kind of measurements, (iii) support of high-performance computing environments, and (iv) seamless setup of user-defined processing pipelines for serial evaluations. Moreover, the multi-platform software Omix may be used for convenient modeling and visualization purposes . With respect to these features, 13CFLUX2 exceeds the functionality of existing 13 C-MFA software systems, namely, Metran and FiatFlux, as well as the 13CFLUX clones OpenFlux, C13, FIA, NMR2FLUX and influx_s . specification of generic measurements is possible. More than 400 syntactical and semantical errors are detected and indicated by expressive error/warning messages. 
