ClicO FS: an interactive web-based service of Circos We present ClicO Free Service, an online web-service based on Circos, which provides a user-friendly, interactive web-based interface with configurable features to generate Circos circular plots. Availability and implementation: Online web-service is freely available atCircos is a Perl language-based tool to represent visual data in a circular form. The native Circos software is provided through a command-line interface (CLI). Installation and configuration of the software, though not difficult for users with command line experience, pose a certain degree of difficulty to those who are not familiar with the CLI. There are other alternatives to Circos that enable plotting of circular images, which including Circoletto, CIRCUS and RCircos . Circoletto and CIRCUS have been developed for more specialised functions. The former integrates Basic Local Alignment Search Tool or BLAST results and the Circos plot via a web-based user interface (UI), whereas the latter specializes in plotting structure variants of genomes. They are not flexible in generating plots with different data types. On the other hand, RCircos supports Circos data track plotting, but it is based on the R-package CLI. Some of the applications above require setup, configuration and coding skills in order to fully utilize the applications. Users with little or no experience in the CLI environment could encounter a demanding learning curve. To address the issue, ClicO FS (Open Circular Layout Interactive Converter) is developed. ClicO FS is a user-friendly web service which allows users to generate Circos plots easily. Not all functions of Circos can be done by ClicO FS, such as chromosome axis breaks.To demonstrate the capability of ClicO FS to generate Circos images without CLI interaction, attempts were made to reproduce relevant published images using ClicO FS. A randomly selected publication with different data types, including links and scatter plots was chosen . Data was extracted from the published paper, and was converted according to the ClicO FS input format. Then ensuing reproduced plot is similar to the original Circos plot from the paper (and Supplement Data) with the pattern and the meaning of the data preserved. In addition, simulated data was generated to plot human and mouse genomes with ClicO FS.shows that ClicO FS is able to generate links, histogram, line plot, scatter plot, heatmap, tiles, text, connector and highlight. Moreover, background color, axes and rules were applied on histogram successfully using the advanced text box. To test the template-based plotting function of ClicO FS, a randomly selected genbank file of a bacterium genome Escherichia coli O157:H7 (NC_002695) was used. Information on the genome including genes, GC plots, and structural RNAs was successfully plotted by ClicO FS . 
