Phylogenetics ClockstaR: choosing the number of relaxed-clock models in molecular phylogenetic analysis Relaxed molecular clocks allow the phylogenetic estimation of evolutionary timescales even when substitution rates vary among branches. In analyses of large multigene datasets, it is often appropriate to use multiple relaxed-clock models to accommodate differing patterns of rate variation among genes. We present ClockstaR, a method for selecting the number of relaxed clocks for multigene datasets.Estimating evolutionary timescales is a common aim of molecular phylogenetic analysis. This can be done using methods based on the molecular clock hypothesis, which postulates a constancy of substitution rates among lineages . However, most datasets exhibit significant levels of rate variation among lineages. This can be caused by differences in population size, mutation rate or the strength of natural selection. The molecular clock can be relaxed to take into account such rate variation, usually by allowing a distinct substitution rate along each branch in the phylogenetic tree. Most relaxedclock models have been implemented in Bayesian frameworks . It is now commonplace to estimate evolutionary timescales using multigene datasets. If the evolutionary process has been heterogeneous among subsets of the data (e.g. among different genes and codon positions), a distinct evolutionary model is needed for each data subset. This presents a challenge for model selection because of the large number of ways in which substitution models and relaxed-clock models can be assigned to the subsets of the data . Determining the best way to assign relaxed-clock models to different subsets of the data is typically done using Bayes factors (e.g.). Performing large numbers of Bayes factor comparisons is often infeasible, especially using computationally intensive methods such as stepping-stone sampling . We present ClockstaR, a method for selecting the optimal number of relaxed clocks for partitioned datasets. It combines a tree-distance metric with a clustering algorithm. Our treedistance metric compares trees based on their pattern of among-lineage rate variation. Consider a simple example in which we have two data subsets, perhaps representing independent loci. Phylogenetic branch lengths are estimated separately for each data subset. Our metric quantifies the differences in branchspecific rates between the two trees. If the score for the metric is low, the two trees have similar patterns of among-lineage rate variation and they can share a relaxed-clock model. Based on the pairwise scores for this metric, a discrete clustering algorithm can be used to infer the optimal partitioning strategy for relaxedclock models when there are multiple data subsets. The user provides sequence alignments of the individual data subsets and a single estimate of the phylogeny (without branch lengths). ClockstaR estimates the optimal number of partitions, representing the smallest number of relaxed-clock models that are needed to describe the data. ClockstaR also assigns the data subsets to these partitions. The output can be used to specify the configuration of relaxed-clock models when performing a molecular dating analysis in software such as BEAST . ClockstaR is implemented in R (R Development Core).We tested the performance of ClockstaR using datasets generated under known conditions. We considered two simulation scenarios and conducted 20 replicates for each scenario. Sequence evolution was simulated using the JukesCantor model along phylogenetic trees with 20 tips to produce 10 alignments of 1000 nt. For the first simulation scenario, we simulated all of the data according to a single relaxed clock. We used a tree with branch lengths sampled from the absolute values of a normal distribution with mean 0.01 and a standard deviation of 0.01. In this scenario, we expected a single group of genes (k 1). In the second simulation scenario, we simulated sequence evolution according to one of three different relaxed clocks. This was done by simulating along three trees, which had identical topologies but had branch lengths sampled independently from the distribution described for the first simulation. We generated three sequence alignments for each of the first two trees, and four sequence alignments for the third tree. For the simulation of each alignment, we included noise in the branch lengths of the form M (0,10 4 ) to represent stochastic variation among alignments. In this scenario, we expected three groups of genes (k 3). ClockstaR identified the correct partitioning scheme for the 20 datasets simulated under each scenario (Supplementary Figs S3A and S4A for the first scenario, and Supplementary Figs S3B and S4B for the second scenario). The analysis of the simulated data with three different relaxed clocks took 8.35 min to run on a Mac G5 with a 2.95-GHz Quad-Core Intel Xeon processor and 16 GB of RAM. We have included an option to parallelize the steps for substitution-model selection and the estimation of sBSD min. The parallelized version took 2.10 min using four cores on the same machine. To illustrate the use of ClockstaR on empirical data, we analyzed multigene datasets from pinnipeds (15 nuclear and 12 mitochondrial genes) and human papillomavirus type 16 (eight genes) (Supplementary Information). For the pinniped data, we found that the optimal partitioning strategy consisted of two groups, one for the nuclear and one for the mitochondrial genes. For the human papillomavirus data, the optimal partitioning scheme involved a single clock model for all genes (Supplementary Figs S3 and S4). By analyzing the relative rate variation among lineages, ClockstaR provides a fast alternative to conducting extensive comparisons using Bayesian and likelihood methods. The method assumes that the data subsets share the same tree topology. However, we do not consider this to be a limitation of the method because data subsets with different topologies should not be concatenated. Instead, they should be assigned separate tree models, which would necessitate the use of separate clock models. One important consideration is that the method determines the optimal partitioning strategy, but it does not test competing molecular-clock models. This requires rigorous statistical testing with other methods, such as Bayes factors . A potential alternative, although more computationally intensive, is reversible-jump Markov chain Monte Carlo, which has been implemented for substitution-model selection but not for molecular-clock models. We believe that our method will be particularly useful for improving molecular-clock analyses of phylogenomic data, which are often hindered by their computational requirements. 
