Structural bioinformatics Cloud4Psi: cloud computing for 3D protein structure similarity searching Popular methods for 3D protein structure similarity searching , especially those that generate high-quality alignments such as Combinatorial Extension (CE) and Flexible structure Alignment by Chaining Aligned fragment pairs allowing Twists (FATCAT) are still time consuming. As a consequence, performing similarity searching against large repositories of structural data requires increased computational resources that are not always available. Cloud computing provides huge amounts of computational power that can be provi-sioned on a pay-as-you-go basis. We have developed the cloud-based system that allows scaling of the similarity searching process vertically and horizontally. Cloud4Psi (Cloud for Protein Similarity) was tested in the Microsoft Azure cloud environment and provided good, almost linearly proportional acceleration when scaled out onto many computational units. Availability and implementation: Cloud4Psi is available as Software as a Service for testing purposes at: http://cloud4psi.cloudapp.net/. For source code and software availability, please visit the Cloud4Psi project home page atCloud computing has emerged as a result of increased requirements for the public availability of computing power and new technologies for data processing. It has become a mechanism that allows for the control of the development of hardware and software resources by introducing the idea of virtualization. In practice, cloud computing allows the public to run applications and services on a distributed network using a virtualized system and its resources, and at the same time, allows to abstract away from the implementation details of the system itself. Apart from the natural applications of cloud computing architecture in business, the concept is also becoming increasingly popular in scientific research, including life sciences, because the theoretically infinite resources of the cloud allow computationally intensive problems to be solved. Cloud-based solutions were proposed for various areas of bioinformatics, including automated sequence analysis , identification of peptide sequences from spectra in mass spectrometry , mapping next-generation sequence data to the human genome and other reference genomes, for single nucleotide polymorphism discovery, genotyping and personal genomics , 3D ligand binding site comparison and similarity searching of a structural proteome , sequence alignment, clustering, assembly, display, editing and phylogeny . The 3D protein structure similarity searching is a computationally complex and time-consuming process that requires enhanced computational resources. This is the motivation behind efforts to develop new methods in the area and build scalable platforms, such as the presented Cloud for Protein Similarity (Cloud4Psi) platform, that allow for the completion of the task much faster by distributing computation on many machines.Scalability of the Cloud4Psi was tested in the Microsoft Azure cloud by increasing the number of Searcher roles from 1 to 18 (horizontal scaling) and by increasing the size, i.e. computational capabilities, of the Searcher roles from A0 to A4 (vertical scaling). Horizontal scaling was performed with the use of A1-sized Searcher roles. A1 size (formerly small size) represents the cheapest computational unit providing one unshared core and is the smallest sized unit recommended for production workloads . During the vertical scaling, we gradually enlarged the sizes of the Searcher roles from A0 (formerly extra small, with one shared central processing unit (CPU) core) to A4 (formerly extra large, eight CPU cores). Tests were performed on a repository containing 1000 protein structures from the PDB. Package size was set to 10 protein structures. A single comparison of a pair of protein structures takes on average 11 s for jCE and 14 s for jFATCAT (both variants). The time required for computation depends on the size of the given, we have shown the n-fold speedup for jCE and jFATCAT algorithms when scaling the Cloud4Psi system horizontally. We noticed that using two instances of the Searcher role increased the speed of the similarity searching by almost 2-fold. Adding more Searcher roles proportionally accelerated the process. However, when using 48 Searcher roles, the dynamics of the acceleration slowed down. Finally, the acceleration ratio (n-fold speedup) reached the level of 15.17 for jCE, and 15.87 for jFATCAT, when the number of instances of the Searcher roles was increased from 1 up to 18. In, we have shown the n-fold speedup when scaling the system vertically. Good results were obtained for Searcher roles of sizes A1 and A2 (A0 is not recommended for production environments). Above size A2, i.e. two computing units, we noticed that the dynamics of the acceleration significantly slowed down. Acceleration for eight CPU cores (A4 size) reached only 4.12 for jFATCAT and 5.73 for jCE. When analyzing the results of the scalability tests, we observed that both types of scaling used experienced a slowdown in the acceleration dynamics. For the horizontal scaling, this was caused by several factors, including concurrent accesses to the VHD while retrieving protein structures processed by particular Searchers, and concurrent accesses to the Storage Table while storing partial results of similarity searches. For the vertical scaling, additional slowdown was brought about by sharing the same CPU and additional coordination of computations carried out in parallel on the same computing unit. Results of the performed tests showed that horizontal scaling with the use of A1 roles provided better n-fold speedup than vertical scaling. Moreover, horizontal scaling was easier for deployment and more elastic; the working system could be scaled automatically according to the current needs. For this reason, the available version of the Cloud4Psi runs on A1 roles and is scaled horizontally. 
