Cloud-Coffee: implementation of a parallel consistency-based multiple alignment algorithm in the T-Coffee package and its benchmarking on the Amazon Elastic-Cloud We present the first parallel implementation of the T-Coffee consistency-based multiple aligner. We benchmark it on the Amazon Elastic Cloud (EC2) and show that the parallelization procedure is reasonably effective. We also conclude that for a web server with moderate usage (10K hits/month) the cloud provides a cost-effective alternative to in-house deployment. Availability: T-Coffee is a freeware open source package available from http://www.tcoffee.org/homepage.html ContactT-Coffee was the first package featuring an implementation of the consistency-based progressive alignment algorithm (for Reviews see). While the use of consistency is widely recognized as an important development in the field of multiple sequence alignment, this improvement comes at a cost. Consistencybased methods have increased CPU and memory consumption proportional to the number of sequences being processed. This overhead is incompatible with the size of the datasets being generated by next generation sequencing technologies. Heuristic solutions have been proposed that rely on a pre-clustering of the sequences, but no effort had yet been reported to extensively parallelize consistency based algorithm and benefit from the widely available multi-core CPUs. To our knowledge this report is the first one describing a parallelization of all steps involving consistencybased alignments. The new implementation is available from version 8.00 and higher of T-Coffee. In practice, its usage is transparent to the user, with the package automatically and explicitly switching to parallel mode whenever multi-core processors are available. The procedure supports all modes of T-Coffee for aligning protein (O) or RNA sequences. It runs on all the platforms where the standard T-Coffee can be compiled and installed (Windows, MacOSX, Linux, UNIX, etc.). To whom correspondence should be addressed.We benchmarked this new implementation on the Amazon Elastic Cloud (EC2) in order to estimate its efficiency and also measure the cost associated with running this type of application on a cloud-environment. Cloud computation is providing the community with an increasingly popular alternative to in-house computational resources. It is therefore becoming an important question to determine the relative cost of these new environments when comparing them with more traditional infrastructures.The parallelization procedure presented here should only be considered an initial framework in which more sophisticated schemes could be implemented. It relies entirely on the UNIX fork function, with child and parent processes communicating via temporary files. For benchmarking purpose, this new implementation has been deployed onto the Amazon Elastic Compute Cloud (EC2) service (http://aws.amazon.com/ec2/). The EC2 is a resource provided by Amazon that makes it possible to run software on virtual machines of various sizes. The Amazon machine image (AMI) used to perform this benchmark is available on: http://s3.amazonaws.com/tcoffee-machine-x32-1.0.1/ (32 bit version) and http://s3.amazonaws.com/tcoffee-machine-x64-1.0.1/ (64 bit version). We also used this benchmark as an opportunity to assess Amazon billing procedure with respect to MSA computation. The way Amazon charges for CPU is complex, with the final bill depending on a combination of I/O, CPU consumption and virtual machines specifications. Benchmarking was done on the RV11 subset of BaliBase version 3 . Results indicate that the new implementation is effectively taking advantage of the multi-core implementation. For instance, the medium instance (5 EC2 Computation Units, ECU) runs 3.7 times faster than its small counterpart (1 ECU). This speedup is observed consistently across all instances, although the relative speedup decreases with the largest instances, probably owing to the increased I/O limiting the speedup. For instance, with 26 ECU, one only obtains 47 of the expected speedup. In practice, the most widely used public T-Coffee server is the one running on the Vital-IT platforms (http://tcoffee.vital-it.ch). It delivers roughly 7000 jobs a month, with an average size close to that of the benchmarks used here (maximum number of sequences 50). If replicated on the EC2, using a dedicated Hi-CPU extra large instance, the cost would be roughly 1000 US$ per year, a figure reasonably competitive with the cost of locally installed/maintained hardware. This suggests that EC2 based deployment of bioinformatics services is a cost effective alternative to in-house deployment of similar services, especially in the case of CPU intensive analysis such as MSA computation. 
