Structural bioinformatics aCSM: noise-free graph-based signatures to large-scale receptor-based ligand prediction Motivation: Receptor-ligand interactions are a central phenomenon in most biological systems. They are characterized by molecular recognition , a complex process mainly driven by physicochemical and structural properties of both receptor and ligand. Understanding and predicting these interactions are major steps towards protein ligand prediction, target identification, lead discovery and drug design. Results: We propose a novel graph-basedbinding pocket signature called aCSM, which proved to be efficient and effective in handling large-scale protein ligand prediction tasks. We compare our results with those described in the literature and demonstrate that our algorithm overcomes the competitors techniques. Finally, we predict novel ligands for proteins from Trypanosoma cruzi, the parasite responsible for Chagas disease, and validate them in silico via a docking protocol, showing the applicability of the method in suggesting ligands for pockets in a real-world scenario. Availability and implementation: Datasets and the source code areTo test and validate the ability of our signature to describe binding sites to support and aid in proteinligand interaction prediction tasks, we designed an extensive set of experiments. First, we show our method can be used in large-scale ligand prediction and evaluate its precision in doing this task. Then, we compare the three proposed versions of aCSM signatures and evaluate which one presents the best descriptive power to ligand prediction. After that, we present the comparative results concerning state-of-the-art methods described in the literature and its respective datasets. Finally, we apply our methodology to pockets of T.cruzi proteins and predict ligands to them, comparing the binding free energies of the ligands docked with receptors with those of real complexes available at the PDB, via a redocking protocol, and with ligands randomly chosen. 
