Complex event extraction at PubMed scale Motivation: There has recently been a notable shift in biomedical information extraction (IE) from relation models toward the more expressive event model, facilitated by the maturation of basic tools for biomedical text analysis and the availability of manually annotated resources. The event model allows detailed representation of complex natural language statements and can support a number of advanced text mining applications ranging from semantic search to pathway extraction. A recent collaborative evaluation demonstrated the potential of event extraction systems, yet there have so far been no studies of the generalization ability of the systems nor the feasibility of large-scale extraction. Results: This study considers event-based IE at PubMed scale. We introduce a system combining publicly available, state-of-the-art methods for domain parsing, named entity recognition and event extraction, and test the system on a representative 1 sample of all PubMed citations. We present the first evaluation of the generalization performance of event extraction systems to this scale and show that despite its computational complexity, event extraction from the entire PubMed is feasible. We further illustrate the value of the extraction approach through a number of analyses of the extracted information. Availability: The event detection system and extracted data are open source licensed and available atIn response to the explosive growth of biomedical scientific literature, there has recently been significant interest in the development of automatic methods for analyzing domain texts . In the previous decade of work on automatic information extraction (IE) from biomedical publications, efforts have focused in particular on the basic task of recognizing entity mentions in text, such as gene, protein or disease names and on the extraction of simple relations of these entities, such as statements of protein protein interactions (PPI;). State-of-the-art IE methods frequently rely on a detailed analysis of sentence structure (parsing) , and several studies have addressed the development and adaptation of parsing methods to biomedical domain texts . The research focus on biomedical text analysis has brought forth notable advances in many areas. Automatic protein and gene Named Entity Recognition (NER) with performance exceeding 90 To whom correspondence should be addressed.We apply the event extraction system to a 1 sample of the 2009 distribution of the PubMed literature database. The full PubMed dataset contains 17.8 million citations, which we downsampled at random to create a dataset of 177 648 citations. To assure that results are representative of the full PubMed database, we performed no document selection or filtering. Consequently, 81 516 of the citations in the sample (46) contain only a title but no abstract, and the earliest citation in the sample is for an article published in 1867 (PMID 17230723). While many of the citations in the sample are thus likely to have limited utility for biomolecular event extraction, their inclusion assures unbiased results and a fair test of the true generalization ability of the applied methods. In total, the system extracted 168 949 events from 29 781 citations in the PubMed sample. The number of extracted events for the nine event types is presented in. The BANNER NER system marked 365 204 gene/protein entities in 54 051 citations in the sample, averaging two mentions per citation overall and almost seven per citation for those containing at least one tagged entity. By this estimate less than a third of PubMed citations contain gene/protein mentions. When the extracted events are broken up by publication year, a strong trend for increasing number of citations containing gene/protein mentions and events is visible, with 25 of citations from the last 10 years containing at least one event . Since the extracted events are of the protein/gene-specific BioNLP09 Shared Task types, this trend can be seen to reflect the growing prominence of molecular biology. Based on the predicted named entities and events, the present release of PubMed can be estimated to contain more than 5 million citations with gene/protein mentions, totaling over 35 million mentions overall and nearly 3 million citations containing events of the Shared Task types, totaling over 16 million such events overall. The number of citations with events has increased consistently with the growth of PubMed until the year 2000. After this the total amount of citations grows more rapidly, perhaps reflecting PubMeds expanded coverage of life science topics since then . While not the primary result of this study, the extraction output can be used to support analysis of some large-scale trends in PubMed. As an example,shows the number of citations per year with mentions of insulin, immunoglobulin G (IgG) and tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-), the three most common named entities identified, and their associated events. We note that citations for insulin show a long-term growing trend, perhaps reflecting the considerable resources directed toward diabetes research. The decreasing number of article abstracts mentioning IgG, despite its centrality in many experimental applications, might be seen to indicate its waning as a primary subject of research, considering average gene quotation frequencies over time . The number of citations mentioning tumor necrosis factor alpha has grown explosively since it was first cloned and named in 1984, showing continued and growing interest in 
