Genome analysis Computational discovery of human coding and non-coding transcripts with conserved splice sites Motivation: Long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) resemble protein-coding mRNAs but do not encode proteins. Most lncRNAs are under lower sequence constraints than protein-coding genes and lack conserved secondary structures, making it hard to predict them computationally. Results: We introduce an approach to predict spliced lncRNAs in vertebrate genomes combining comparative genomics and machine learning. It is based on detecting signatures of characteristic splice site evolution in vertebrate whole genome alignments. First, we predict individual splice sites, then assemble compatible sites into exon candidates, and finally predict multi-exon transcripts. Using a novel method to evaluate typical splice site substitution patterns that explicitly takes the species phylogeny into account, we show that individual splice sites can be accurately predicted. Since our approach relies only on predicted splice sites, it can uncover both coding and non-coding exons. We show that our predicted exons and partial transcripts are mostly non-coding and lack conserved secondary structures. These exons are of particular interest, since existing computational approaches cannot detect them. Transcriptome sequencing data indicate tissue-specific expression patterns of predicted exons and there is evidence that increasing sequencing depth and breadth will validate additional predictions. We also found a significant enrichment of predicted exons that form multi-exon transcript parts, and we experimentally validate such a novel multi-exon gene. Overall, we obtain 336 novel multi-exon transcript predictions from human intergenic regions. Our results indicate the existence of novel human transcripts that are conserved in evolution and our approach contributes to the completion of the human transcript catalog. Availability and Implementation: Predicted human splice sites, exons and gene structures together with a Perl implementation of the tree-based log-odds scoring and a supplementary PDFA series of high-throughput transcriptomics studies utilizing a variety of different technologies revealed that mammalian genomes are pervasively transcribed into a complex mosaic of transcripts . A large extent of these transcripts consists of small and long non-protein-coding RNAs (ncRNAs). Due to the diverse nature of these transcripts, our catalog of genes is still incomplete. Computational prediction of protein-coding genes is based on characteristic features of coding regions that distinguish them from non-coding DNA . Coding genes exhibit a clear evolutionary signature, since mutations are often synonymous and preserve the reading frame. These signals can be exploited to find coding genes by comparative genomics methods . Also machine learning-based approaches that recognize splice sites, transcriptional and translational start and stop signals can successfully detect coding genes . In contrast to protein-coding genes, ncRNAs form a heterogeneous class of transcripts that lacks common sequence patterns, complicating their detection in genomic DNA. SomePage: 1895 18941900De novo splice site prediction: as illustrated in, we trained SVM classifier using the evolutionary signatures of vertebrate splice sites to distinguish real from false splice sites. Indicating a good discriminative power, our models achieved high AUC values of 0.96 for donors and 0.94 for acceptors . On an independent test set with 5000 sites which were not used for training, we correctly detected 89 of all true donors at a false positive rate (FPR) of 4 and 84 of all true acceptors at an FPR of 9 (SVM classification confidence p 0.5). To reduce the FPR to less than 2, we used a more stringent SVM classification confidence of p 0.9, which still correctly identifies 81 (73) of real donor (acceptor) sites. ThisFirst, we extracted splice site candidates from genome-wide alignments and set up a training set (left panel). We distinguished between (i) real annotated splice sites in genic regions; (ii) false splice sites in genic regions (GT/AG dinucleotides that were similar to real splice sites but were not supported by transcript data); and (iii) the remaining set of intergenic splice site candidates. Secondly, we compiled a set of evolutionary signatures that are characteristic for vertebrate splice sites and trained donor and acceptor SVM models (middle panel, ROC curves are shown for both models). Thirdly, these SVMs were used to classify intergenic candidates as either real or false splice sites (right panel). (B) To obtain exon predictions, we searched for pairs of splice sites with a maximal distance of 300 nt (left), trained a second SVM that considered features of EST-confirmed exons (middle) and ranked predicted exons. Finally, predicted exons were then clustered into partial multi-exon transcripts. (C) Several splice sites and exons/introns of the shown example are confirmed by ESTs and short RNA-seq reads.demonstrates that our approach is capable of identifying splice sites at high specificity. Out of 54 million intergenic candidates, about 3.4 million sites were predicted to be real (p 0.5).We present a computational procedure to identify novel spliced transcripts in vertebrate genomes using conserved splice sites and signatures of length-constrained exons. We deliberately neglect features of protein-coding genes and outline a first conceptual approach toward the de novo prediction of lncRNAs. We have previously demonstrated the value of conserved introns for the prediction of conserved, and hence likely functional, ncRNAs in insect genomes . In this work, we now tackled the problem of applying this conceptual idea to vertebrate genomes, where ab initio splice site and intron prediction is challenging due to the drastically increased absolute length and length variability 
