Computer vision-based automated peak picking applied to protein NMR spectra Motivation: A detailed analysis of multidimensional NMR spectra of macromolecules requires the identification of individual resonances (peaks). This task can be tedious and time-consuming and often requires support by experienced users. Automated peak picking algorithms were introduced more than 25 years ago, but there are still major deficiencies/flaws that often prevent complete and error free peak picking of biological macromolecule spectra. The major challenges of automated peak picking algorithms is both the distinction of artifacts from real peaks particularly from those with irregular shapes and also picking peaks in spectral regions with overlapping resonances which are very hard to resolve by existing computer algorithms. In both of these cases a visual inspection approach could be more effective than a blind algorithm. Results: We present a novel approach using computer vision (CV) methodology which could be better adapted to the problem of peak recognition. After suitable training we successfully applied the CV algorithm to spectra of medium-sized soluble proteins up to molecular weights of 26 kDa and to a 130 kDa complex of a tetrameric membrane protein in detergent micelles. Our CV approach outperforms commonly used programs. With suitable training datasets the application of the presented method can be extended to automated peak picking in multidimensional spectra of nucleic acids or carbohydrates and adapted to solid-state NMR spectra.Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy has become a standard technique in biological research. NMR applied on solutions of biological macromolecules provides data on their structural as well as dynamic properties and supplies detailed information on molecular interactions. The analysis of the NMR spectra often still includes substantial manual work even though a broad range of automated procedures have been developed . Automation of spectral analysis is particularly important in NMR-based drug discovery where hundreds of two-dimensional spectra are measured during screening of libraries of chemical compounds . Moreover, the increasing amount of structural genomics and proteomics using NMR necessitate fast automated procedures to alleviate the time-consuminguser-dependent classical analysis of spectra . A rapid and robust user-independent pipeline in NMR data analysis would relieve many NMR spectroscopists from routine tasks. The first step in a fully computerized analysis of NMR spectra is automated peak picking-a task that has attracted substantial interest and there are numerous algorithms available . And yet manual peak picking usually still provides superior results. Existing programs for automated peak picking can suffer from limited ability to discriminate between signals, artifacts and noise requiring external intervention by experienced spectroscopists for an exhaustive recognition of all resonances. In manual peak picking a researcher visually selects peaks with the expected shapes that, from experience, represent real signals. Thus, he relies on his prior knowledge about the appearance of real peaks as local extrema in the spectrum. An analogous approach is used by people to recognize solid objects in planar images, where small patches are analyzed for the decision whether or not they contain an object. Computer vision is a rapidly developing branch of computer science that attempts to automate this process known as the object detection problem. Computer vision techniques have been successfully applied in many areas as e.g. in face detection , for pedestrian detection , or car detection . Object detection is usually a two-phase process, where binary classification is followed by feature extraction from a local image patch. Different image features and binary classifiers are available. To our knowledge such an image processing approach has not been applied to automate peak picking in which it could provide a reliable algorithm for the identification of peaks in multidimensional NMR spectra. In this work, we developed a peak picking algorithm based on computer vision which uses a technique called Histogram of Oriented Gradients (HOG) as a feature extraction procedure and Support Vector Machine (SVM) as a binary classifier for reasons discussed later in the text. As input, the CV-Peak Picker accepts any kind of spectra with different data formats (Sparky, Topspinor VNMR [) and returns peak lists for a given spectrum in Sparky format (http://www.cgl.ucsf.edu/home/sparky). The general scheme of the CV-Peak Picker function is illustrated in.We evaluated the CV-Peak Picker algorithm by comparing the results with those of established programs PICKY , WaVPeak using a set of benchmark spectra and additional spectra . Spectra of only 3 proteins from the original benchmark set were made available to us by the authors of PICKY and WaVPeak. We also tested our CV based algorithm on a set of different spectra obtained for proteins with molecular weights from 13 to 130 kDa to test the high potential of the CV software. All spectra were picked independently of any other spectrum or input, i.e. the number of artifacts will be reduced when combining peak lists from different spectra which is necessary for sequence specific assignments or structure calculations. For most spectra all real peaks were correctly picked with a remarkably small number of artifacts. In the evaluation of our results we used generally accepted statistical measures: precision, recall and F-measure. Precision, P, and recall, R, are defined as P (TP/(TP FP))100 and R (TP/(TP FN))100, where TP stands for true positives (real peaks which were classified as true peaks), FN stands for false negatives (real peaks which were classified as artifacts) and FP stands for false positives (false peaks classified as real peaks). Combination of these two measures is represented as F-measure, F 2RP/(R P), and allows for direct comparisons of performance between different methods . Values of the F-measure fall into the range from 0 to 100, where 100 represents highest performance of the method.The correlation coefficient was calculated with the standard function Correlation Coefficient in Microsoft Excel.compares the peak picking performance of CV-Peak Picker, PICKY and WaVPeak on the set of benchmarked spectra as introduced by and on more challenging spectra selected by us. A comparison of the F-measures between CVPeak Picker, PICKY and WaVPeak shows that CV-Peak Picker performs substantially better on each of the benchmark spectra. In the same table correlation coefficient between F-measure and signal-tonoise ratio is presented. In, we summarize peak picking results for spectra which are more challenging than the benchmark spectra. In two cases for the highly overlapped spectra of the 130 kDa helical membrane protein KcsA alpha and of intrinsically disordered Nlgn-3, CV-Peak Picker reaches F-measures of about 75. For the remaining proteins high F-measure scores of approximately 95 are achieved. Exemplary planes of these five spectra are shown in Supplementary. The reference peak lists for the spectra in, were obtained from original peak lists (provided by the authors or found in assignment papers) which we manually corrected as they contained only assigned peaks and not all real peaks. The performance of CV-Peak Picker is exemplified in Supplementarywith six consecutive cross sections of the HN(CO)CA spectrum of KcsA.lists the 3 parameters (1 obligatory and 2 optional) which must be set before running the CV-Peak Picker. In the Supporting Information, we graphically represent the dependence of the performance (F-measure) of CV-Peak Picker on the selection of the size of bounding box (Supplementary) and on the threshold value r 0 (Supplementary). These figures show that the values for the bounding box and r 0 can be chosen in a wide range without substantially changing the resulting peak list. Further, in Supplementary Table S2, we provide average scanning times per 2D layer of various 3D heteronuclear correlation spectra measured with different proteins.The application of computer vision techniques for a peak picking algorithm applied to NMR spectra described here, results in fully automated peak recognition in a wide range of triple-resonance spectra obtained with five different globular proteins with molecular weights between 13 and 26 kDa and a uniformly deuterated tetrameric (4 17.5 kDa) alpha helical membrane protein in detergent micelles (130 kDa in complex). Moreover it outperforms other currently used peak pickers as evaluated by benchmark spectra. Features and system requirements of the most popular peak picking programs are presented in Supplementary Table S1. A standard measure used for comparison of the performance of peak picking algorithms, the F-measure, is a combination of two components: recall and precision. The precision measure contains information on the excessively picked artifacts, while recall contains information on missed real peaks. In practice, for structural studies recall has significantly higher importance than precision as loss of information (missed real peaks) often cannot be compensated and thus it may lead to incomplete assignments. Conversely, excessively picked artifacts are rather easily rejected in an assignment process. Inthe performance of CV-Peak Picker and WaVPeak as well as PICKY are compared. CV-Peak Picker always has superior precision scores and overall F-measures. However, in ten cases CV-Peak Picker reaches slightly worse recall scores than PICKY and/or WaVPeak. Although these differences are relatively small, weObligatory: Estimation of the proper size of the scanning window is crucial for the scanning procedure. The peak picker performs well if the side length of the window selected by the user varies up to 6 50 from the optimal one. CV-Peak Picker offers an interactive tool which allows a user to draw a scanning window on the contour plot of the spectrum.Threshold r 0 Optional: The parameter can be used for fine tuning after all peaks are evaluated using SVM. Often change of the default value is not necessary.The parameter can be adjusted using an interactive graphical user interface, which updates visualization of the scanning results in real time according to the value of r 0. Number of scanned peaks per layer Optional: The parameter is introduced exclusively for performance optimization. A user can request to scan all peaks in the spectrum (even small artifacts) by assigning an arbitrarily large value to this parameter. Nevertheless, scanning the biggest 500 peaks on each layer of a tripleresonance spectrum is usually sufficient.The parameter can be specified in the CV-Peak Picker configuration file. speculate that a substantial increase of the number of peaks in the CV-Peak Pickers training set, might help reaching higher recall scores. On the other hand, WaVPeak requires a preset number of the expected real peaks in the spectrum, which results in a classification of questionable peaks as real.also presents a correlation between the F-measure and the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR). CVPeak Picker reaches the similar F-measure at low SNR which is a substantial advantage for its versatility and usefulness in real spectra with suboptimal SNR. The applications of CV-Peak Picker in this work demonstrate that the analysis of NMR spectra of proteins with difficult, highly overlapped spectra including IDPs or molten globules can be fully automated. User attention can be focused on validation of the results. We believe that highest accuracy can be achieved by coupling our software with powerful assignment programs as e.g. FLYA (L pez-Mndez and G ntert, 2006). The methodology presented in this paper has high potential for investigations and analysis of NMR spectra of nucleic acids and carbohydrates, and could be adapted for peak picking of solid state NMR spectra. 
