Conpair: concordance and contamination estimator for matched tumor–normal pairs Motivation: Sequencing of matched tumor and normal samples is the standard study design for reliable detection of somatic alterations. However, even very low levels of cross-sample contamination significantly impact calling of somatic mutations, because contaminant germline variants can be incorrectly interpreted as somatic. There are currently no sequence-only based methods that reliably estimate contamination levels in tumor samples, which frequently display copy number changes. As a solution, we developed Conpair, a tool for detection of sample swaps and cross-individual contamination in whole-genome and whole-exome tumornormal sequencing experiments. Results: On a ladder of in silico contaminated samples, we demonstrated that Conpair reliably measures contamination levels as low as 0.1, even in presence of copy number changes. We also estimated contamination levels in glioblastoma WGS and WXS tumornormal datasets from TCGA and showed that they strongly correlate with tumornormal concordance, as well as with the number of germline variants called as somatic by several widely-used somatic callers. Availability and Implementation: The method is available at: https://github.com/nygenome/The decreasing cost of high-throughput sequencing allows analysis of larger number of samples than before, which as an unfortunate side effect increases the chances of sample mix-ups and contamination. Cancer studies often jointly analyze matched tumornormal (TN) samples in order to detect somatic mutations that are present in the tumor. Even a very low level of cross-individual contamination in the tumor sample may introduce many low allele frequency germline variants that will be interpreted as somatic by somatic variant calling algorithms, resulting in greatly reduced specificity (Supplementary). Detecting sample swaps and low level contamination in tumor samples are critical quality control steps that should precede every somatic analysis. However, estimating contamination in tumor samples is confounded by frequent copy number alterations that affect allelic ratio distributions. VerifyBamID and ContEst have emerged as standard methods to estimate sample contamination. VerifyBamID maximizes the likelihood of a contamination level in a two-sample mixture model, given the alleles and base qualities, using a grid search over a range of contamination fractions and refining the result using a numerical root-finding method. VerifyBamID provides an accurate measure for contamination in mostly diploid (copy-neutral) samples, however it may interpret copy number-driven allelic imbalance frequently seen in cancer as contamination. ContEst calculates the maximum a posteriori estimate of contamination based on the base identities and quality V C The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press.In silico contaminated data. We constructed two independent sets of in silico contaminated cancer samples by mixing reads from BAM files from copy number aberrant TCGA glioblastoma exomes at a ladder from 0.1 to 95, yielding a total of 245 samples at 49 different contamination levels (a) in each set. For each sample we estimated a using Conpair, VerifyBamID and ContEst (sequence-only mode). Our results indicate a better agreement between Conpair and the ground truth inand D). To assess which method was more accurate, we correlated the contamination estimates with the TN concordance values (calculated based only on markers that were homozygous in the normal sample). Tumor samples with TN concordance values close to 100 cannot be significantly contaminated (Supplementary). Based on this fact, we were able to show that VerifyBamID highly overestimated a on the majority of the tumor samples, and ContEst overestimated a on the subset of the WGA samples. The results returned by Conpair show a monotonic dependency between the TN concordance and contamination values . As an independent metric, we also looked at the number of known germline variants called as somatic by three somatic callers: MuTect , LoFreq and Strelka . These numbers were strongly correlated with the contamination in the tumor samples returned by Conpair (Spearman r: 0.76). The obtained results suggest that Conpair is more robust in estimating contamination levels in the light of different library preparation methods. 
