Sequence analysis ContEst: estimating cross-contamination of human samples in next-generation sequencing data Here, we present ContEst, a tool for estimating the level of cross-individual contamination in next-generation sequencing data. We demonstrate the accuracy of ContEst across a range of contamination levels, sources and read depths using sequencing data mixed in silico at known concentrations. We applied our tool to published cancer sequencing datasets and report their estimated contamination levels. Availability and Implementation: ContEst is a GATK module, and distributed under a BSD style license atNext-generation sequencing methods are generating vast amounts of short sequence reads for the purpose of studying DNA sequence variations and identifying those that affect human disease. Many novel methods allow for the interrogation of the structure of the genome with unprecedented sensitivity due to the digital nature of the data . Rare events present in only a fraction of the sequenced material, as is the case in somatic mutation discovery in cancer genome studies , can be accurately detected by sequencing to greater read depth. Moreover, genome partitioning techniques allow for even greater sensitivity at a lower cost by targeting only regions of interest. However, these methods can be heavily compromised by contamination. Three major classes of DNA contamination exist: cross-individual, within-individual and cross-species. Crossindividual is the most critical to control, as even small levels of contamination can cause many false positives, particularly in contrastive tumor versus normal cancer studies . Withinindividual contamination, such as normal DNA contamination of tumor DNA in cancer studies, typically leads to decreased sensitivity. Cross-species contamination is easily detected by aligning to unique To whom correspondence should be addressed. The authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the first two authors should be regarded as joint First authors. regions of potentially contaminating species. In order to address the most critical need, we developed ContEst within the GATK to accurately estimate the cross-individual contamination level in next-generation sequencing data.Using next-generation sequencing data from the TCGA Ovarian publication (TCGA Research), we identified 12 exome-capture BAMs with low contamination, having very few reads that do not match the homozygous calls from their genotyping arrays (Supplementary). Next, we created in silico datasets by mixing a primary sample with one or more contaminants at specific contamination levels (Supplementary Material). Reassuringly, the estimate of the contamination level of the primary sample alone was 0.08. ContEst was able to accurately predict the level of contamination across a wide range of conditions including more than a single contaminating sample. (and C) In order to assess the accuracy as a function of sequencing depth, we downsampled the depth of the sequencing data , and demonstrated that ContEst produces accurate estimates even with average coverage 5. Applying the method to data obtained from the TCGA Ovarian publication (Supplementary) indicates that low levels of physical contamination are common . Independent validation of all somatic events likely ensured that this contamination did not cause false positives in the publication. However, given a distribution of contamination as seen in TCGA , and an estimated error rate at non-dbSNP sites from contamination as shown in, a typical cancer project might expect 10 of the samples to have 1.5 contamination, causing 0.2 errors/Mb per sample, which is a significant fraction of the typical somatic mutation rate of 1/Mb per sample. In addition, ContEst has proven to be essential in lab quality control to identify and monitor sources of contamination, which has helped decrease contamination at the Broad Institute. 
