Genome analysis Control-FREEC: a tool for assessing copy number and allelic content using next-generation sequencing data More and more cancer studies use next-generation sequencing (NGS) data to detect various types of genomic variation. However, even when researchers have such data at hand, single-nucleotide polymorphism arrays have been considered necessary to assess copy number alterations and especially loss of heterozygosity (LOH). Here, we present the tool Control-FREEC that enables automatic calculation of copy number and allelic content profiles from NGS data, and consequently predicts regions of genomic alteration such as gains, losses and LOH. Taking as input aligned reads, Control-FREEC constructs copy number and B-allele frequency profiles. The profiles are then normalized, segmented and analyzed in order to assign genotype status (copy number and allelic content) to each genomic region. When a matched normal sample is provided, Control-FREEC discriminates somatic from germline events. Control-FREEC is able to analyze overdiploid tumor samples and samples contaminated by normal cells. Low mappability regions can be excluded from the analysis using provided mappability tracks. Availability: C++ source code is available at: http://bioinfo.curie.fr/ projects/freec/Cancer genomes often display copy number alterations (CNAs) and/or losses of heterozygosity (LOH) . Genetic abnormalities in specific regions may be related to the aggressiveness of a cancer and be associated with clinical outcomes . To detect CNA and LOH regions, single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) arrays have been recently much in use . Furthermore, next-generation sequencing (NGS) has been moving to replace SNP-arrays in prediction of CNAs . A recent study presented ExomeCNV, To whom correspondence should be addressed. a tool to predict CNAs and LOH using exome sequencing data . However, detection of LOH regions and, more generally, prediction of genotype status (copy number and allelic content) of an altered region using whole-genome sequencing data has remained unsolved. The main challenges to doing so are non-uniform read coverage of genomic positions [for example, due to different mappability and GC-content (and alignment bias (reference allele coverage is usually higher than the coverage of the alternative allele). Thus, the resulting signal is noisier and more difficult to process than in the case of SNP arrays. Here, we present Control-FREEC (Control-FREE Copy number and allelic content caller)a tool that annotates genotypes and discovers CNAs and LOH. Control-FREEC inherits many features from FREEC (assessment of copy number variation and evaluation of contamination by normal cells) as well as the general methodology of the GAP algorithm for SNP arrays . Control-FREEC takes as an input aligned reads, then constructs and normalizes the copy number profile, constructs the B-allele frequency (BAF) profile, segments both profiles, ascribes the genotype status to each segment using both copy number and allelic frequency information, then annotates genomic alterations. If a control (matched normal) sample is available, Control-FREEC discerns somatic variants from germline ones.We applied Control-FREEC to detect CNAs and LOH regions in a tumor/normal dataset for a neuroblastoma patient (30x-coverage, unpublished data). Control-FREEC detected somatic CNA and LOH regions covering 75 of the tumor genome and was able to identify the genotype status despite contamination of the tumor sample by normal cells (estimated percent of tumor cells was 60). Our results agreed with the SNP-array analysis output. We obtained 95.4 consistency between the results of Control-FREEC and GAP , which we applied to SNP array data generated for the same tumor sample (Supplementary Materials).Control-FREEC is a tool for automatic detection of CNAs and LOH regions using NGS data. It accurately calls genotype status even when no control experiment is available and/or the genome is polyploid. It corrects for GC-content and mappability biases. In the case of tumor samples, Control-FREEC is able to evaluate the level of contamination by normal cells. The software is written in C++ and freely available. 
