Cooperative development of logical modelling standards and tools with CoLoMoTo Downloaded from The identification of large regulatory and signalling networks involved in the control of crucial cellular processes calls for proper modelling approaches. Indeed, models can help elucidate properties of these networks, understand their behaviour and provide (testable) predictions by performing in silico experiments. In this context, qualitative, logical frameworks have emerged as relevant approaches, as demonstrated by a growing number of published models, along with new methodologies and software tools. This productive activity now requires a concerted effort to ensure model reusability and interoperability between tools. Following an outline of the logical modelling framework, we present the most important achievements of the Consortium for Logical Models and Tools, along with future objectives. Our aim is to advertise this open community, which welcomes contributions from all researchers interested in logical modelling or in related mathematical and computational developments. Contact: contact@colomoto.org 1 Motivation The rapid development of novel biomolecular technologies has fostered the study of complex regulatory systems during the last decade. Mathematical models have become invaluable tools for understanding the dynamical behaviour of such systems. There are various types of formalisms, which differ in the level of detail and model complexity (de Jong, 2002; Karlebach and Shamir, 2008). Logical (or logic), discrete models comprise the most abstract dynamic models and constitute nowadays a popular modelling framework (for reviews see Bornholdt, 2005; Saadatpour and Albert, 2013; Samaga and Klamt, 2013). In logical models, components are represented by discrete variables with a small range of possible values , with the most extreme case being Boolean models, where each component can be either active or inactive (Kauffman, 1969;The rapid development of novel biomolecular technologies has fostered the study of complex regulatory systems during the last decade. Mathematical models have become invaluable tools for understanding the dynamical behaviour of such systems. There are various types of formalisms, which differ in the level of detail and model complexity . Logical (or logic), discrete models comprise the most abstract dynamic models and constitute nowadays a popular modelling framework (for reviews see). In logical models, components are represented by discrete variables with a small range of possible values, with the most extreme case being Boolean models, where each component can be either active or inactive . Regulatory effects are defined by logical rules or lookup tables. The relative simplicity of these models provides several advantages over more complex modelling formalisms, such as systems of differential equations. In particular, logical models do not require precise knowledge of kinetic parameters, which makes them suitable for large models comprising up to several hundreds of components. Due to their qualitative nature, it is possible to incorporate various kinds of information in logical models. For example, natural-language statements from publications or expert knowledge on regulatory interactions can easily be transformed into logical rules . Although logical models provide a rough approximation of concentration levels, they can reproduce the behaviour of many biological systems as illustrated in examples of case studies later. The discrete step functions resulting from simulations of logical models constitute a plausible simplification of typical sigmoidal response curves (; Thomas and d). Biomolecular measurements can be analysed in the discrete framework by applying specialized discretization procedures . Logical models have been successfully applied to a wide range of regulatory and signalling systems, in a variety of organisms. Examples include: yeast cell cycle (;), pathogenhost interactions , development of the sea urchin embryo , development of Drosophila melanogaster (; S nchez and), mammalian cell cycle , murine cardiac development , determination of cell fates in human , multiscale signal transduction in human epithelial cells , human T-cell receptor signalling and T-cell differentiation . The Consortium for Logical Models and Tools (CoLoMoTo, http://colomoto.org) was informally launched during a meeting at Instituto Gulbenkian de Cincia (Portugal) in November 2010 to gather interested scientists and promote the cooperative development of shared standards and tools. This meeting was followed by a second one at the European Bioinformatics Institute (United Kingdom) in March 2012, which focused more specifically on a common standard for the exchange of logical model [the Systems Biology Markup Language (SBML) Level 3 Qualitative Models or qual package, see later]. The third meeting was held at the University of Lausanne (Switzerland) in April 2014, bringing together 22 participants from 14 different institutions. It included sessions devoted to scientific presentations covering methodological and computational developments, as well as models for real case applications. In addition, the participants discussed several topics requiring community consensus, including the development of standards, collaborative tools and model repositories. CoLoMoTo is an international open community that brings together modellers, curators and developers of methods and tools. It aims at the definition of standards for model representation and interchange, and the establishment of criteria for the comparison of methods, models and tools. Finally, CoLoMoTo seeks to promote these methods, tools and models. We first outline the logical modelling approach to then present the recent achievements of the consortium, as well as the outcomes of the last meeting regarding future directions. 
