Genome analysis CopyMap: localization and calling of copy number variation by joint analysis of hybridization data from multiple individuals The program package CopyMap identifies copy number variation from oligo-hybridization and CGH data. Using a time-dependent hidden Markov model to combine evidence of copy number variants (CNVs) across multiple carriers, CopyMap is substantially more accurate than standard hidden Markov methods in identifying CNVs and calling CNV-carriers. Moreover, CopyMap provides more precise estimates of CNV-boundaries. Availability: The C-source code and detailed documentation for the program CopyMap is available on the Internet atCopy number variants (CNVs) are segments of the genome that exist in different copy numbers in the population. About 90 of CNVs have two allelic states , the remaining 10 have multiple states. As CNVs encompass genes as well as non-coding DNA, they are good candidates for functional variation . Commonly used method for identifying copy number variable sites are Representational Oligonucleotide Microarray Analysis , Agilent competitive genomic hybridization (CGH) and tiling arrays . These methods interrogate DNA using a dense set of probes covering the non-repetitive regions of the genome. However, the resolution of each individual probe is usually low. As CNVs often extend over multiple probes, resolution is improved by combining information across neighboring probes. Hidden Markov model (HMM) methods are among the most commonly applied tools to analyze such data. First proposed by, these methods exploit the local correlation of trait status and are computationally highly efficient. More complex versions of these algorithms specifically designed for CNVs have since been developed and applied to large datasets . However, most HMM algorithms analyze datasets one individual at a time. Thus, CNVs that are shared among individuals are only identified after comparing CNV calls between individuals. Conceptually, this approach has two disadvantages: first, no detection power is gained by the fact that multiple individuals carry the same CNV. In most regions of the genome, CNVs are rare or absent and therefore models assign a low probability of transitioning into the CNV state. However, at a locus known to have variable copy number in one individual, the probability that another individual has a variant copy number at the same locus should be higher. Jointly analyzing individuals results in a higher detection rate. Secondly, each time a CNV is identified, its borders will be estimated independently of all other individuals. Jointly estimating the borders from all carriers results in a more efficient use of information. This idea has been applied in several recent methods for mapping CNVs in selected regions from genotyping data . I present the program CopyMap, an alternative HMM method for CNV detection and CNV calling that jointly analyzes genomewide data for all individuals in a sample. CopyMap is specifically designed for hybridization arrays, but it can also be applied to single nucleotide polymorphism genotyping arrays. 
