Data and text mining CPFP: a central proteomics facilities pipeline The central proteomics facilities pipeline (CPFP) provides identification, validation, and quantitation of peptides and proteins from LC-MS/MS datasets through an easy to use web interface. It is the first analysis pipeline targeted specifically at the needs of proteomics core facilities, reducing the data analysis load on staff, and allowing facility clients to easily access and work with their data. Identification of peptides is performed using multiple search engines, their output combined and validated using state-of-the-art techniques for improved results. Cluster execution of jobs allows analysis capacity to be increased easily as demand grows. Availability: Released under the Common Development and Distribution License atMass spectrometry (MS) has emerged as the dominant technique for the identification and quantitation of peptides and proteins from complex mixtures. A large number of institutions have established core proteomics facilities to provide MS services, sharing equipment and expertise with a wide range of users . With the growth in demand for high-throughput LC-MS/MS analysis of complex samples, and increased interest in quantitative proteomics, effective analysis of data can be challenging. Existing freely available pipelines such as TPP , CPAS (Labkey Software Foundation), OpenMS/TOPP , SwissPIT and MASSPECTRAS support a variety of proteomics search engines and validation tools, but often require users to understand the various parameter formats of the search engines, reconcile differences in post-translational modification (PTM) specifications and manually run multiple searches if more than one search engine is to be used. Commercial applications such as Scaffold (Proteome Software, Portland OR, USA), PEAKS (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc., Waterloo ON, Canada) and Sorcerer (Sage-N Research, Milpitas CA, USA) provide user-friendly interfaces but require significant outlay if multiple licences are required. The central proteomics facilities pipeline (CPFP) aims to provide a simpleThe DLD-LTQ and Serum-Orbi datasets described inwere analysed using CPFP. Searches used the IPI-Human sequence database v3.64 and the parameters given in. Results were filtered to an estimated 1 FDR using the targetdecoy procedure.shows the number of identifications for Mascot, X!TANDEM k-score and OMSSA searches processed separately, and a combined result merged using iProphet. Combining the results of the three search engines gives a higher number of peptide spectrum matches (PSMs) and unique peptide identifications versus the best performing single search engine (OMSSA in both cases). The increase in PSMs is 6.6 and 14.4 for the DLD1-LTQ and Serum-Orbi datasets, respectively. Submission to and combination of results from all search engines is automated, and required no additional steps for the user versus the use of a single search engine. Timings for the Serum-Orbi dataset on a 32-core cluster were 9 min 47 s for Mascot, 7 min 31 s for X!TANDEM and 11 min 50 s for OMSSA individually, versus 16 min 45 s for all searches in parallel, followed by combination of results. 
