Sequence analysis A deeper look into transcription regulatory code by preferred pair distance templates for transcription factor binding sites Motivation: Modern experimental methods provide substantial information on proteinDNA recognition. Studying arrangements of transcription factor binding sites (TFBSs) of interacting transcription factors (TFs) advances understanding of the transcription regulatory code. Results: We constructed binding motifs for TFs forming a complex with HIF-1 at the erythropoietin 3-enhancer. Corresponding TFBSs were predicted in the segments around transcription start sites (TSSs) of all human genes. Using the genome-wide set of regulatory regions, we observed several strongly preferred distances between hypoxia-responsive element (HRE) and binding sites of a particular cofactor protein. The set of preferred distances was called as a preferred pair distance template (PPDT). PPDT dramatically depended on the TF and orientation of its binding sites relative to HRE. PPDT evaluated from the genome-wide set of regulatory sequences was used to detect significant PPDT-consistent binding site pairs in regulatory regions of hypoxia-responsive genes. We believe PPDT can help to reveal the layout of eukaryotic regulatory segments. Contact:The regulatory code controlling gene expression in higher eukaryotes still remains elusive. It is challenging to understand how a 1D DNA text directs formation of the protein complex that controls gene expression in a particular cell type in specific conditions. Some insight is gained by using the well-known concept of composite elements consisting of binding sites for different regulatory proteins separated by specific distances . Despite more than 15 years of study, information about the scale and specificity of possible distances between binding sites remains insufficient. To whom correspondence should be addressed. Present address: Computational Bioscience Research Center, King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST), Thuwal, Saudi Arabia. New technologies like ChIP-Seq have dramatically increased the quality of identification of TFBSs, both in vitro and in vivo. Recently, it was shown that in some cases there are several preferred distances between binding sites of some TFs. Here, we illustrate that distance preferences themselves are extremely well exhibited and that this phenomenon appears to be much more common, at least in the case of Homo sapiens TFs involved in regulating responses for hypoxic conditions. We studied distributions of distances between TFBSs identified in silico for TFs involved in known proteinprotein interactions. As a case study, we took TFs participating in the regulation of the erithropoetin (EPO) gene expression in hypoxia response in human cells.Hypoxia-regulated set is enriched with PPDT-consistent binding site pairs:shows k/n ratio P-values for the pairs of HRE HRE and HRESp1 binding sites estimated using genome-wide PPDTs. Supplementarydisplay similar graphs for HRE and other cofactor binding sites in different orientations. Better (lower) P-values are exhibited for small k/n threshold levels. Specifically this means that regulatory regions of hypoxia-dependent genes often exhibit at least one PPDT-consistent pair of HREcofactor TFBS. The k/n ratio test demonstrated that positioning of the following TFBS pairs can be used to distinguish the hypoxia-regulated set from Page: 2623 26212624the genome-wide set: HRE-p300 (direct orientation), HREHRE (direct orientation), HRESp1 (both orientations), HRESMAD3 (reverse orientation). Preferred locations of other TFBS pairs were not exhibited in the hypoxia-regulated gene set, which may indicate that the binding of these TFs in such an orientation is not characteristic for regulation of hypoxia response or that in this case TF binding pattern is so complex that it cannot be easily recovered with the help of HRE-centered PPDTs. Intersite distance preferences are stable and prevalent: PPDDs are obviously sensitive to motif modifications or changes of PWM score threshold. Still, general patterns of distance preferences are quite stable and seem not to be a specific feature of the particular model for the HRE or another TFBS. Supplementaryshows the HREHRE and HRESp1 PPDDs for different motif thresholds. Supplementaryshows the comparison for PPDDs obtained for TRANSFAC PWMs and our PWMs constructed with ChIPMunk. Supplementaryshows genome-wide PPDDs centered at Sp1 binding sites instead of HRE used as the anchoring element elsewhere in this article. Mystery of low-transcription regions: in fact, HIF-1 can regulate hundreds of genes . Different studies report dramatically different sets of HIF1a targets (see e.g. Venn diagram in). Since we could not reliably guess which genes were not regulated by HIF-1 and thus could be taken as the negative control set, we tried to compare our findings with DNA sequence segments performing low transcription activity or no transcription activity at all. To this end, we selected a set of DNA segments located far from any DNA region, for which transcription activity was demonstrated in TSS-calling experiments (see the description of the set in the Section 2 and Section 1 in Supplementary Material). Surprisingly, in the low-transcription regions, PPDD peaks were exhibited even more explicitly than in the genome-wide set (Supplementary). Meanwhile, the relative number of binding site pairs in this case was much lower than in the genome-wide set (Supplementary). We failed to provide an exhaustive explanation of a clearer PPDD for the low transcribed dataset. Yet, it is noteworthy that preparation of the genome-wide dataset included the merging of regions centered at closely located alternative TSSs. It is possible that the genomewide PPDD includes distances measured between TFBSs belonging to different homotypic clusters which regulate transcription from different TSSs and this interference smears the PPDD. Moreover, we counted the number of CAGE-tags located in three subsets of low-transcription regions set: the first having no HRE HRE or HRESp1 binding site pairs, the second having pairs at any distance not consistent with PPDT within 600 bp HRE-centered windows and the third having pairs of TFBS at PPDT-consistent distances according to PPDT evaluated from the genome-wide set. Supplementarydisplays the median of the number of CAGE tags per sequence. The sequences with binding site pairs located at PPDT-consistent distances tend to be relatively enriched with CAGE-tags. Thus, we suggest that the PPDT-consistent binding site pairs found in low-transcription regions are somehow linked to nearby transcriptionally active regions.In our previous work , we reported the observation that a large genome-wide set of long segments exhibits some peaks in the distribution of distances between TFBSs of interacting TFs. In this study, we introduce the concept of PPDT, a set of selected preferred distances between TFBSs, which, as we demonstrate, are expected to be found in the regulatory regions of genes, regulated by the corresponding TFs. Preferred distances between TFBS for different TF pairs form substantially different sets, but in all cases a general pattern of a peak comb over a background of more or less random distances is observed. It is tempting to believe that binding sites found at PPDT inconsistent distances are likely to form complexes with TFs other than HIF-1 or simply are false positives of PWM scanning. Yet, PPDT found in the low-transcribed regions allows the conclusion that there might be some yet unknown factor controlling possible TFBS positioning in DNA. Obviously, PPDD/Ts provide additional information on the specificity of TF binding, especially when the total number of putative TFBSs in the regulatory regions is small. However, the difficulties of using PPDD/Ts for identification of functional binding sites should not be underestimated. Binding site arrangements in regulatory DNA segments are complex, with sites often overlapping each other. Most of the sequences in the hypoxia-regulated dataset contain homotypic clusters of HRE. So when one calculates all pairwise distances between binding sites of two transcription factors, the number of observed intersite distances becomes large. Paradoxically, the worst display of preferred distances is in the hypoxia-regulated dataset (Supplementary). This happens because this dataset is rather small, containing only 158 sequences, 25 of which do not contain any HRE elements. Many sequences contain only one or two pairs of binding sites of the specified type. In the hypoxia-regulated dataset, each distance is rarely found more often than five times. Thus, most numbers of preferred distance occurrences are statistically insignificant, and the PPDD/T pattern is unclear. This makes it difficult to conclude whether the hypoxiaregulated set really has some major characteristic differences in PPDDs when compared with the genome-wide set. Another paradox is that PPDTs for HRESp1 and HREHRE homotypic site pairs estimated on the genome-wide gene set can be efficiently used to distinguish the hypoxia-regulated set . This Page: 2624 26212624 
