CSSSCL: a python package that uses combined sequence similarity scores for accurate taxonomic classification of long and short sequence reads Sequence comparison of genetic material between known and unknown organisms plays a crucial role in genomics, metagenomics and phylogenetic analysis. The emerging long-read sequencing technologies can now produce reads of tens of kilobases in length that promise a more accurate assessment of their origin. To facilitate the classification of long and short DNA sequences , we have developed a Python package that implements a new sequence classification model that we have demonstrated to improve the classification accuracy when compared with other state of the art classification methods. For the purpose of validation, and to demonstrate its usefulness, we test the combined sequence similarity score classifier (CSSSCL) using three different datasets, including a metagenomic dataset composed of short reads. Availability and implementation: Packages source code and test datasets are available under the GPLv3 license at https://github.com/oicr-ibc/cssscl.One important problem in computational molecular biology is the correct classification of unknown DNA sequences, given a database of sequences of known origin. Next-generation sequencing technologies have dramatically accelerated the study of microbial and viral genomes with the promise of uncovering thousands of previously unknown species. These high-throughput studies have, however, produced mostly short-read data (i.e. reads between 100 and 400 bp in length) that present a great challenge for phylogenetic classification (and other related metagenomic analysis or automated genome assemblies . Emerging long read sequencing technologies such as PacBio RS and Oxford Nanopore MinION can already generate sequences over tens of kb in length that for the first time allow highly accurate automated assemblies of finished bacterial genomes (. In this article, we introduce the CSSSCL package for taxonomic classification of DNA sequences that implements the classification model presented in our recent paper , we describe its features and show its effectiveness at classifying sequences using three different datasets.We use three different datasets (one viral and two bacterial) to demonstrate the ability of the CSSSCL program to accurately classify DNA sequences. The first dataset consists of viral nucleotide sequences that due to their considerable variability are expected to pose a greater challenge to most phylogenic classification algorithms. The entire set of viral genomes was downloaded from the NCBI RefSeq database. From a total of 5808 viral genomes, we selected 263 different genera with at least three different sequence entries per taxon label, producing a total of 3917 different complete viral sequences. This set of sequences was then split into two using the 2/3 (training) and 1/3 (test) splits (we also required that the training set contains at least two entries per taxon label at the genus level). The training and test sets produced in this way contained, respectively, 2900 and 1017 viral sequences. The second dataset consists of bacterial nucleotide sequences (Bacterial dataset I). The entire set of 5242 bacterial sequences was downloaded from the NCBI RefSeq database containing 2647 RefSeq complete genomes. From the entire set, we selected 277 different genera with at least three different sequence entries per taxon label, producing a total of 4601 different microbial sequences. These sequences were then split into the training and test sets (as explained above) containing,respectively, 3420 and 1181 bacterial sequences. To demonstrate that our program can also classify short reads, we use the metagenomic dataset Bacterial dataset II (MiSeq) introduced in Kraken consisting of 10 000 reads with an average read length of 156 bp (the training set for this dataset is composed of the entire set of 5242 bacterial sequences mentioned above). In, we compare the performance of CSSSCL to two other classifiers namely NBC and Kraken using the identical training and test sets. We chose NBC for its high accuracy and for being the most sensitive metagenomics classifier according to Bazinet and Cummings (2012) and Kraken for being currently the fastest metagenomics classifier according to Wood and Salzberg (2014). The results presented inshow that CSSSCL achieves higher precision and recall (or sensitivity) than either NBC or Kraken when classifying viral genomes and higher recall (or sensitivity) when classifying bacterial genomes. For short reads, CSSSCL outperforms in recall/sensitivity both NBC, Kraken and Kraken-GB (Sensitivity: 86.23 as presented in) and achieves identical high precision as Kraken but a slightly lower precision than Kraken-GB (Precision: 98.84 as presented in Wood and) that uses a much larger database.We propose a new Python package called CSSSCL to facilitate the accurate taxonomic classification of long and short DNA sequences. By using three new datasets, we confirm the results of our previous findings and show that the implementation of our model presented inis correct and capable of classifying both viral and bacterial sequences with high precision and recall and within a reasonable time frame. Future work will include assessing the performance of additional similarity measures that could be added to the CSSSCL package. 
