adegenet 1.3-1: new tools for the analysis of genome-wide SNP data While the R software is becoming a standard for the analysis of genetic data, classical population genetics tools are being challenged by the increasing availability of genomic sequences. Dedicated tools are needed for harnessing the large amount of information generated by next-generation sequencing technologies. We introduce new tools implemented in the adegenet 1.3-1 package for handling and analyzing genome-wide single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) data. Using a bit-level coding scheme for SNP data and parallelized computation, adegenet enables the analysis of large genome-wide SNPs datasets using standard personal computers. Availability: adegenet 1.3-1 is available from CRAN: http://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/adegenet/. Information and support including a dedicated forum of discussion can be found on the adegenet website: http://adegenet.r-forge.r-project.org/. adegenet is released with a manual and four tutorials totalling over 300 pages of documentation, and distributed under the GNU General Public Licence (2).The free software R (R Development Core) is becoming a standard for the analysis of genetic data, offering a wealth of packages dedicated to population genetics , phylogenetics or genome-wide association studies . Until recently, classical genetic marker data such as microsatellites could be analyzed using standard tools and personal computers. However, the increasing availability of genomic sequence data has challenged both the tools and the ressources needed to carry such analyses. While some specific packages have been developed for human association studies , more general tools for the analysis of the genetic structure of biological populations are needed. In this article, we introduce new tools implemented in the R package adegenet which To whom correspondence should be addressed. allow large genomic datasets (e.g. hundreds of individuals typed for hundreds of thousands SNPs) to be analyzed using standard personal computers. As an illustration, we show how a new implementation of the discriminant analysis of principal components (DAPC) can be used to identify structuring alleles from genomic data with minimum computing resources. 
