Deep and wide digging for binding motifs in ChIP-Seq data ChIP-Seq data are a new challenge for motif discovery. Such a data typically consists of thousands of DNA segments with base-specific coverage values. We present a new version of our DNA motif discovery software ChIPMunk adapted for ChIP-Seq data. ChIPMunk is an iterative algorithm that combines greedy optimization with bootstrapping and uses coverage profiles as motif positional preferences. ChIPMunk does not require truncation of long DNA segments and it is practical for processing up to tens of thousands of data sequences. Comparison with traditional (MEME) or ChIP-Seq-oriented (HMS) motif discovery tools shows that ChIPMunk identifies the correct motifs with the same or better quality but works dramatically faster.ChIP-Seq is an efficient technology for the identification of DNA sites of a specific protein binding. Being coupled with peak finding algorithms , it yields a set of DNA segments with each sequence position having a weight reflecting how often DNA nearby was cross-linked with the protein of interest during ChIP stage (the so-called peaks). There can be tens of thousands of DNA segment, some longer than 1000 bp. Classic tools like Weeder , Gibbs Sampler or MEME were tested for motif discovery in ChIP-Seq segments, but proved to be inefficient for the whole amount of data. Therefore, a fraction of top DNA segments was usually taken or/and the segments were truncated around the peak maxima . Tools like cERMIT and HMS have been developed for motif discovery from ChIP-Seq data. In this note, we present a motif discovery algorithm that can extract the single optimal motif from large datasets like ChIP-Seq without any preprocessing, while taking into account the peak shape. To whom correspondence should be addressed.We took three ChIP-Seq datasets: NRSF , GABP and EWS-FLI1 . We used FindPeaks to obtain enriched regions (the peaks). Segments with strict GGAA-type repeats were excluded from the EWS-FLI1 dataset. Motif lengths were fixed at 21, 12 and 11 for NRSF, GABP and EWS-FLI1, respectively. Top 100 (NRSF, GABP) and top 500 (EWS-FLI1) peaks were taken to test several motif discovery tools, including MEME , SeSiMCMC and HMS, the novel ChIP-Seq-oriented Gibbs sampler . We used sets of segments that were truncated from 10 to 100 of the peak lengths and were centered at the peak maxima. The fraction of peaks truncated to 10 of initial length centered at the peak maximum with motif hits having scores greater than the mean + 3 SD of score distribution over all w-mers was used as the measure of motif quality. We assessed the time efficiency of motif discovery and the resulting quality of motifs identified from 500 EWS-FLI1 peaks . For short segments covering only 10 of the peaks, all the tested tools performed equally well. When the segment length was increased MEME and SeSiMCMC, that did not take the peak shape into account, identified incorrect motifs. In contrast, ChIPMunk (in peak mode) always identified the correct motif. In the mode that did not take peak shapes into account, ChIPMunk failed to identify the correct motif in longer segments. Nevertheless, in both modes, ChIPMunk clearly outperformed HMS that took into account peak shapes, both in speed and quality. For NRSF and GABP, the correct motifs were extracted by the all tools in a wider range of sequence lengths, which probably indicates better data quality (see the STS 4). All in all, here we presented an extended version of our motif discovery tool ChIPMunk that allows using information from strong but also from weaker sites (see STS 10). ChIPMunk is reasonably fast and practically can process datasets of thousands of sequences (see the STS 8) even on a personal computer, taking advantage of the modern multi-core processors. 
