Structural bioinformatics DelPhi web server v2: incorporating atomic-style geometrical figures into the computational protocol A new edition of the DelPhi web server, DelPhi web server v2, is released to include atomic presentation of geometrical figures. These geometrical objects can be used to model nano-size objects together with real biological macromolecules. The position and size of the object can be manipulated by the user in real time until desired results are achieved. The server fixes structural defects, adds hydrogen atoms and calculates electrostatic energies and the corresponding electrostatic potential and ionic distributions. Availability and implementation: The web server follows a client server architecture built on PHP and HTML and utilizes DelPhi software. The computation is carried out on supercomputer cluster and results are given back to the user via http protocol, including the ability to visualize the structure and corresponding electrostatic potential via Jmol implementation. The DelPhi web server is available fromElectrostatics play a profound role in molecular biology due to biological macromolecules being made of thousands/millions of atoms, with different size and partial charge situated at short distances. The importance of electrostatic interactions and energies is illustrated by the fact that many biological phenomena are predominantly electrostatic in origin as is salt-dependence of binding and folding , pHdependence and pKa shifts in proteins and RNAs . The main obstacle in modeling electrostatics in biological systems is the presence of water . Here we utilize a particular resource, DelPhi , version 5, which is based on the continuum approach and solves the PoissonBoltzmann equation (PBE) via the Finite-Difference algorithm. We developed a DelPhi web server which is aimed to provide easy access to performing electrostatic calculations in biological systems without prior knowledge and without having a computational infrastructure in place . To whom correspondence should be addressed.In addition, with the progress of nano-technology, researchers frequently aim at modeling hybrid systems comprised of nanoobjects and biological macromolecules as proteins deposited on a dielectric plate, membranes probed with the tip of an atomic force microscope, interactions of amino acids with spherical nanoparticles and many others. However, currently there is no available software and web server capable of modeling such hybrid systems [a web server utilizing APBS to solve PBE in systems comprising of protein and water was recently reported (. To address this need, we have developed the next generation of DelPhi web server v2, which allows the users to create nano-objects, change their position and shape in real time, and carry out electrostatic calculations in the presence of biological macromolecules.The above algorithms were implemented using C++ code for flexibility and speed and were incorporated into the DelPhi web server (see Supplementary Material for more details). The geometrical object can be generated by selecting Yes for the option Do you wish to create objects? at the File upload and input parameter form for DelPhi runpage. Once this option is selected, the user is given the choice to create four different types of geometrical figures: sphere, cylinder, cone and parallelepiped. Upon choosing a particular geometrical figure, a new window appears showing the geometrical shape positioned in a Cartesian reference frame. The same figure provides a set of indicators detailing what the input parameters are for this particular shape. The user should then enter the required parameters that define the position and dimensions of the appropriate geometrical shape. In addition, the user can also enter the desired dielectric constant for the object, which can vary from the proteins dielectric constant. This allows the modeling of various systems including biological macromolecules and nano-objects that have variegated dielectric properties. The positioning of the geometrical object from the manually entered parameters may not correspond to the desired location of the object due to the offset of the origin in crystallographic structures which is not at (0,0,0). To allow the users to further refine the position, dimensions and shape of the corresponding geometrical object in the DelPhi web server, the object manipulation for the combined protein-object PDB file has been enhanced with real-time manipulation of the object using JavaScript sliders coupled with the Jmol applet. Such an implementation is very useful because it shows a skeleton of the objects new positioning and dimensions. Output screen of the Delphi web server showing a protein and the corresponding geometrical object with the potential mapped onto the combined surface protein-object and thus helps users to orient the object exactly. This object can then be generated and re-rendered to show the exact location and size of the object as a final confirmation for the user before the job is processed with DelPhi. The adjustment of the objects position, dimensions and shape can be repeated as many times as desired until the appropriate orientation is found. The next page of the web server offers various output options including which components of the electrostatic energy need to be calculated and what output files are to be generated as potential or dielectric maps, or site potential files. Then, the input files and selected options are transferred to Clemsons supercomputer cluster, the Palmetto high-performance computing facility (http://www. clemson.edu/ccit/rsch_computing/). Once the jobs are completed, the user receives email notification that the job is finished along with ID number and a link. By clicking on the link, the user is directed to the DelPhi web server download and visualization page. On this page, the user is presented with several ways to download the results, the protonated and fixed PDB files, and the parameter files used in this particular job. In addition, the page utilizes Jmol. If the user had requested a potential map to be calculated, then the potential map in CUBE format is also available for download and for visualization. By clicking on the potential map file, the page then maps the potential onto the molecular surface of the corresponding biological macromolecule. The potential levels and the color scheme can be manipulated by the user for visualization purposes. By using the Jmol applet, the 3D structure mapped with the electrostatic potential can be rotated and zoomed in if necessary.demonstrates the output capabilities of Delphi web server. It shows a particular protein, the CLIC2 protein , being deposited on or probed with the four geometrical objects described in this article. It can be seen that the objects surface is quite smooth indicating the atomic-style representation provides a very good approximation of solid objects. The protein was modeled with a dielectric constant of 4 and the objects with a dielectric constant of 20. It can also be seen that in some cases the object penetrates inside the protein on purpose. Such a scenario can be used to model a membrane protein inserted into membrane slab .illustrates the case of a protein touching a cylindrical rod, which can be a fiber wire or another nano-object.shows a protein deposited on a spherical nano-particle. Lastly,demonstrates a cone-protein complex, which can be viewed as the tip of atomic force microscope that has already passed through the protein. In terms of the calculated energies, the atomic-style representation of the objects was tested against the original implementation of the geometrical shapes in DelPhi , and it was found that the results in terms of the solvation energy are consistent within 0.1. 
