Gene expression Differential variability improves the identification of cancer risk markers in DNA methylation studies profiling precursor cancer lesions Motivation: The standard paradigm in omic disciplines has been to identify biologically relevant biomarkers using statistics that reflect differences in mean levels of a molecular quantity such as mRNA expression or DNA methylation. Recently, however, it has been proposed that differential epigenetic variability may mark genes that contribute to the risk of complex genetic diseases like cancer and that identification of risk and early detection markers may therefore benefit from statistics based on differential variability. Results: Using four genome-wide DNA methylation datasets totalling 311 epithelial samples and encompassing all stages of cervical carcinogenesis, we here formally demonstrate that differential variability, as a criterion for selecting DNA methylation features, can identify cancer risk markers more reliably than statistics based on differences in mean methylation. We show that differential variability selects features with heterogeneous outlier methylation profiles and that these play a key role in the early stages of carcinogenesis. Moreover, differentially variable features identified in precursor non-invasive lesions exhibit significantly increased enrichment for developmental genes compared with differentially methylated sites. Conversely, differential variability does not add predictive value in cancer studies profiling invasive tumours or whole-blood tissue. Finally, we incorporate the differential variability feature selection step into a novel adaptive index prediction algorithm called EVORA (epigenetic variable outliers for risk prediction analysis), and demonstrate that EVORA compares favourably to powerful prediction algorithms based on differential methylation statistics. Conclusions: Statistics based on differential variability improve the detection of cancer risk markers in the context of DNA methylation studies profiling epithelial preinvasive neoplasias. We present a novel algorithm (EVORA) which could be used for prediction and diagnosis of precursor epithelial cancer lesions. Availability: R-scripts implementing EVORA are available from CRAN (www.r-project.org).Statistical testing in the context of large omic datasets (e.g. mRNA expression or DNA methylation arrays) has relied on the assumption that the most relevant features are those which differ most significantly in terms of their mean levels . Thus, parametric testing using t-tests or regularized versions thereof has been the standard approach for identifying and ranking features of interest . This paradigm of testing for differences in the means of two distributions has been enormously successful, as demonstrated for instance by the popularity of algorithms and R-packages such as limma or pamr . However, recent insights obtained in cancer epigenomics suggest that identifying features that differ in terms of the second moment of a distribution, i.e. variability, may also be as relevant or important for understanding or predicting disease phenotypes . Indeed, it has been proposed that certain genes which are prone to stochastic epigenetic variation, may contribute to the risk of complex genetic diseases like cancer and that exposure to environmental risk factors may underlie much of this stochastic variation . Supporting this view, a recent study has shown that features that are differentially methylated between cancer and normal tissue are generally also much more variable in cancer tissue itself, suggesting that the relevant features could be identified using the concept of differential variability . In this manuscript we formally demonstrate, in the context of DNA methylation studies profiling precancerous conditions, that statistics based on differential variability identifies true positives more reliably than statistics based on differential methylation. We show how this can be attributed to the importance of heterogeneous outlier methylation profiles where the outliers define a small proportion of samples in the precancerous phenotype. Conversely, we also demonstrate that differential variability underperforms whenever outlier methylation profiles are conspicuously absent, as is the case for invasive cancer and whole-blood (WB) tissue. We show that the outlier features present in the early precursor cancer lesions are more heavily enriched for developmental genes than differentially methylated ones, underpinning their biological importance. Finally, we incorporate the differentialBased on the insights of previous epigenetic studies , we hypothesized that differential variability in DNA methylation would play a particularly important role in the context of early carcinogenesis. Thus, to formally demonstrate that differential variability identifies more biologically relevant DNA methylation features than statistics based on differential methylation, we devised an objective training/evaluation set strategy in the context of CC, a cancer for which the cell of origin is known and for which access to early precursor lesions is possible through routine large scale screening programs . Specifically, we analyzed DNA methylation profiles for a total of 311 samples, including normal tissue, normal cells preceding a high-grade). Thus, our strategy was to pick as discovery/training sets those cohorts representing the two earliest stages of CC (precursor CIN2+ and CIN2+ lesions both of which are non-invasive), and to use cohorts representing similar or more advanced stages as evaluation/test sets. In one context we used LBC1, consisting of a balanced number of normal (24) and CIN2+ (24) samples, as the discovery/training set, and used sets LBC2 and CC for evaluation/testing. In the second context, we used the ARTISTIC (ART) cohort representing a balanced set of normal (77) and precursor CIN2+ (75) samples for discovery/training, and used LBC1, LBC2 and CC as evaluation/test sets. 
