A Bayesian approach for structure learning in oscillating regulatory networks Motivation: Oscillations lie at the core of many biological processes, from the cell cycle, to circadian oscillations and developmental processes. Time-keeping mechanisms are essential to enable organisms to adapt to varying conditions in environmental cycles, from day/night to seasonal. Transcriptional regulatory networks are one of the mechanisms behind these biological oscillations. However, while identifying cyclically expressed genes from time series measurements is relatively easy, determining the structure of the interaction network underpinning the oscillation is a far more challenging problem. Results: Here, we explicitly leverage the oscillatory nature of the transcriptional signals and present a method for reconstructing network interactions tailored to this special but important class of genetic circuits. Our method is based on projecting the signal onto a set of oscillatory basis functions using a Discrete Fourier Transform. We build a Bayesian Hierarchical model within a frequency domain linear model in order to enforce sparsity and incorporate prior knowledge about the network structure. Experiments on real and simulated data show that the method can lead to substantial improvements over competing approaches if the oscillatory assumption is met, and remains competitive also in cases it is not. Availability: DSS, experiment scripts and data are available at http://homepages.inf.ed.ac.uk/gsan guin/DSS.zip.Cyclic behaviour is ubiquitous in biology. The importance of oscillatory systems stems both from the necessity to adapt to the many environmental cycles (circadian, annual, etc.), as well as to maintain intrinsically periodic processes such as the cell cycle. Both of these type of oscillations are essential to many physiological processes, and malfunctions in the cellular time keeping mechanisms are frequently associated with disease, further motivating the study of these systems . Genetic regulatory networks are at the core of many of these biological oscillators. These networks can sustain oscillatory behaviour in protein levels through specific architectures involving multiple feedback loops of transcriptional regulation. For example, a transcriptional oscillator is thought to drive the Arabidopsis thaliana circadian clock through mutual repression of three transcriptional regulators . The cell cycle is another oscillatory process, which controls cell division and duplication. In the case of Saccharomyces cerevisiae, experiments and dynamical models suggest that the cell cycle is the result of a transition between two self-maintaining steady states, driven by two antagonistic classes of proteins . Evidence suggests that a transcriptional network is an important V C The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press.In this section, we assess the performance of our method on two realistic simulated datasets and a real dataset, comparing its performance to two other state of the art methods. We call our method DSS, for DFT-based Spike and Slab model. The first simulated dataset was generated from a well-known model for the A.thaliana circadian clock network . This model is a non-linear Ordinary Differential Equation (ODE)-based model which exhibits regular oscillations (for suitable parametrisations), thus matching one of our main modelling assumptions. However, it is a non-linear model, hence introducing an element of model mismatch. As a second synthetic benchmark dataset we used one of the datasets provided by the DREAM 4 challenge . This is again a non-linear model, which exhibits damped oscillatory dynamics in some of the nodes; thus, this dataset presents considerably more elements of model mismatch. The last experiment tested the method on a real dataset of gene expression levels obtained in a micro-array experiment for the Saccharomyces cerevisiae cell cycle transcriptional network . Results were assessed in terms of area under the Precision-Recall (AUPR) curve; PR curves plot the fraction of correctly called instances versus the ratio of true positives over true positives plus false negatives. An ideal classifier would give a AUPR of 1, while a random baseline would return the ratio of positives negatives. Inference of the models parameters was conducted by Gibbs Sampling from the model presented in . In total, 5000 samples were obtained. The last 1000 samples were selected and averaged to compute the conditional probability of a link p h ij 1j given the model and the expression data, see Supplementary information Sections 1.1.1 and 1.1.2 for details into the inputs and outputs of the program. 
