Discovering drug–drug interactions: a text-mining and reasoning approach based on properties of drug metabolism Motivation: Identifying drugdrug interactions (DDIs) is a critical process in drug administration and drug development. Clinical support tools often provide comprehensive lists of DDIs, but they usually lack the supporting scientific evidences and different tools can return inconsistent results. In this article, we propose a novel approach that integrates text mining and automated reasoning to derive DDIs. Through the extraction of various facts of drug metabolism, not only the DDIs that are explicitly mentioned in text can be extracted but also the potential interactions that can be inferred by reasoning. Results: Our approach was able to find several potential DDIs that are not present in DrugBank. We manually evaluated these interactions based on their supporting evidences, and our analysis revealed that 81.3 of these interactions are determined to be correct. This suggests that our approach can uncover potential DDIs with scientific evidences explaining the mechanism of the interactions.One of the challenges in drug administration and drug development is the need to identify and avoid potential drugdrug interactions (DDIs). When several drugs are being administered, there is a possibility of adverse drug reactions as one drug can increase or decrease the effect of another drug. During the course of drug development, it is vital to identify possible drug interactions with the new drug compound that is being investigated. Revealing the mechanism behind the drug interactions can provide the necessary scientific evidences for further investigation of the drug compound. The ability to find DDIs and their scientific evidences efficiently and economically can have an impact on the current approach in drug administration and drug development. A common source of finding DDIs is through the use of commercial databases such as the Thomson Micromedex DrugDex System (Micromedex) or online freely available drug databases such as DrugBank . While such databases provide extensive lists of DDIs, it is typical that scientific evidences are not provided as part of the information for DDIs. This becomes an issue when a recent study showed that there are 25 of disagreements between two drug compendia . The lack of scientific evidences complicates the process of verifying To whom correspondence should be addressed. the discrepancies. An ideal resource not only should provide a comprehensive list of DDIs in a cost-efficient manner but also the mechanism behind the interactions. Text mining of Medline abstracts is a logical choice to identify DDIs, as much of the scientific information is frequently available in biomedical articles. In addition, text mining has the potential of finding large number of DDIs from text in a cost-effective manner. In this article, we propose a novel approach of discovering DDIs through the integration of biological domain knowledge with biological facts from Medline abstracts and curated sources. Our work is one of the few that utilizes biological domain knowledge in their applications, such as the generation of metabolic networks based on stoichiometric constraints , hypothesis generation in signaling pathways and synthesis of pharmacokinetic pathways . In this work, the biological domain knowledge includes the mechanism of how drug A influences the effect of drug B through the induction or inhibition the enzymes that are responsible for the metabolism of B. With the domain knowledge, the other component is to find the biological facts to support specific DDIs. Examples of biological facts from Medline abstracts include the identification of which enzymes are induced or inhibited by drugs as well as the enzymes that are responsible for the metabolism of drugs. Curated sources such as UniProt (http://www.uniprot.org) and Gene Ontology (GO) annotations (http://www.geneontology.org) are utilized to identify protein families such as enzymes and transcription factors. Integrating the biological domain knowledge with the biological facts allows us to derive DDIs. This step is achieved through the use of logic representation of the domain knowledge and automated reasoning. It is important to note that our approach differs from typical extraction approach, which focuses on the extraction of interactions that are stated explicitly in the text. In our approach, various properties can be extracted from different publications so that the system utilizes the extracted properties to derive potential DDIs. This enables us to discover potential DDIs that are yet to be annotated in comprehensive resources about DDIs such as DrugBank. The rest of the article is outlined as follows. We describe the basic properties of DDIs that we encode in our system in Section 2. In Section 3, the processes of acquiring the necessary facts and interactions from existing knowledge bases and Medline abstracts are described. In addition, the reasoning component is illustrated in how the properties of drug metabolism are encoded in order to derive DDIs. In Section 4, we describe the possible scenarios of applying our approach to drug administration and drug design. We demonstrate the feasibility of our approach by illustrating theWe used DrugBank to assess the performance of our approach in finding DDIs. We selected 265 drugs and found the interactions among these drugs. This results in a gold standard of 494 DDIs with description stating that one drug increases or decreases the effect of another drug. We call these set of drug interactions as the DrugBank gold standard. We first evaluated the performance of the extraction of explicit DDIs. The results are summarized in. An explicit drug interaction is extracted from a single sentence in a Medline abstract. Our extraction queries for explicit drug interactions are specific to the 265 drugs that we selected as the DrugBank gold standard, and the extraction queries result in 170 drug interactions. We found that 132 of the extracted drug interactions (i.e. a precision of 77.7) are indeed correct based on their originating sentences, and 20 of them (i.e. an overlap of 11.8) are annotated in the DrugBank gold standard. The results indicate that there is a potentially large number of published drug interactions that are not captured by DrugBank. On the other hand, the small overlap between our extracted drug interactions and the interactions in the DrugBank gold standard also indicates that there is room for improvement in extracting drug interactions. With the extraction of implicit DDIs, we expect to achieve a higher number of inferred interactions and overlap with the DrugBank gold standard. The extraction of implicit DDIs is divided into two parts:(i) direct inhibition or induction of enzymes; (ii) indirect inhibition or induction of enzymes. The extraction of implicit DDIs of (i) and (ii) from 17 million Medline abstracts result in 4154 and 979 interactions. Among the extracted interactions in (i), 108 interactions coincide with the interactions in the DrugBank gold standard. For the ones that are not found in the DrugBank gold standard, we manually evaluated the interactions based on their supporting evidences. In particular, we evaluated 315 interactions that are supported by at least two evidences for drug, induces/inhibits, protein relations and four evidences for protein, metabolizes, drug relations. We realized that 256 or 81.3 of the interactions are extracted with the correct evidences to support the DDIs. Among the 256. As an example, in the case of creating the gold standard for protein, metabolizes, drug relations, we extracted sentences with co-occurrences of drug and gene mentions together with one of the keywords metabolized, metabolize, metabolized, metabolize, substrate in the individual sentences. We then examined which of the sentences indeed indicate protein, metabolizes, drug relations. This results in 372 evidence sentences that we use as a gold standard for evaluating protein, metabolizes, drug relations. It is important to note that in the creation of gold standard, we omit possible cross-sentence relations. In addition, we relied on the named entity recognizers to identify sentences with co-occurrences of drug and gene mentions. The extraction performance for each individual interactions are illustrated in. In the case of protein, regulates, protein relations, our strategy is to extract co-occurrences of CYP enzymes and one of the transcription factors known for regulating xenobiotic enzymes (i.e. AhR, NR1I2, NR1I3). This restricted co-occurrence query allows us to find high-quality relations for transcription factors, regulates, enzymes. The negation queries are for the extraction of negative relations for the various interactions listed in. Keywords such as no, not are included in these queries. We only evaluated the precision of the extraction of negative interactions by analyzing each of the extracted relation and its supporting evidence without creating a gold standard. 
