Gene expression Discovering relational-based association rules with multiple minimum supports on microarray datasets Motivation: Association rule analysis methods are important techniques applied to gene expression data for finding expression relationships between genes. However, previous methods implicitly assume that all genes have similar importance, or they ignore the individual importance of each gene. The relation intensity between any two items has never been taken into consideration. Therefore, we proposed a technique named REMMAR (RElational-based Multiple Minimum supports Association Rules) algorithm to tackle this problem. This method adjusts the minimum relation support (MRS) for each gene pair depending on the regulatory relation intensity to discover more important association rules with stronger biological meaning. Results: In the actual case study of this research, REMMAR utilized the shortest distance between any two genes in the Saccharomyces cerevisiae gene regulatory network (GRN) as the relation intensity to discover the association rules from two S.cerevisiae gene expression datasets. Under experimental evaluation, REMMAR can generate more rules with stronger relation intensity, and filter out rules without biological meaning in the proteinprotein interaction network (PPIN). Furthermore, the proposed method has a higher precision (100) than the precision of reference Apriori method (87.5) for the discovered rules use a literature survey. Therefore, the proposed REMMAR algorithm can discover stronger association rules in biological relationships dissimilated by traditional methods to assist biologists in complicated genetic exploration. Availability: The source code in Java and other materials used in this study are available at http://websystem.Formerly, biologists were constrained to performing laboratory experiments to clarify gene expressions; however, manipulation of multiple genes is very costly, in both time and money. Microarray technology is a useful tool for gaining the expression value of many genes in the cell environment while simultaneously tackling To whom correspondence should be addressed. the manipulation problem. At present, how to explain the cells inner working with efficiency has become another challenge for the biologist. Data mining technologies are ideal for discovering information from large datasets. Thus, a growing number of researchers are applying data mining technologies for efficient elucidation of genetic information. Recently, various types of analysis methods were proposed to analyze gene expression data, such as clustering analysis , association rule analysis , classification analysis , among others. These methods equip biologists to extract biological knowledge quickly for different analysis purposes. Association rule analysis is used to find and describe relationships between genes. Every rule indicates whether a given gene is expressed or repressed to describe expression relationships in a cellular environment. Suppose that we discover the rule gene x = gene y ,gene z from a gene expression dataset. This rule states that when gene x is expressed, gene y is repressed and gene z is expressed together in this dataset. Two important thresholds exist to measure the significance of a rule, support and confidence. The support of a rule is the frequency that gene x , gene y and gene z together in a sample. The confidence of a rule is the frequency that gene y , gene z occurs when gene x occurs . Although various types of association rule analysis methods were proposed to analyze gene expression data , not all of the proposed methods fit with the goal of our work in exploring the regulatory relations of genes from microarray datasets.adopted the half-space technique to discover quantitative association rules on numeric microarray datasets without requiring a discretization process. However, their approach cannot mine a complete set of relevant rules when applying the method on microarray profile.proposed the GenMiner method to mine association rules from a set of gene expression profiles and the publicly available gene ontology (GO) terms. However, the main purpose of their approach is different from ours since they were in an attempt to extract relationships between certain genes and its annotated GO terms. Finally,proposed an association rule mining algorithm called MaxConf, which was developed with a row-enumeration method. However, it did not consider the constraintPage: 3143 31423148 REMMAR of minimum support threshold. Moreover, the results of applying the algorithm on microarray dataset can only show high confidence gene regulations. Nevertheless, MaxConf may fail in discovering the longer rules with the context containing many items. However, the longer rules are usually more important than the rules that are shorter in size in the real applications . On the other hand, the rules with low support would also be mined using their algorithm. These rules are likely to be regarded as false positive as long as they appear infrequently over all samples. Differentiated with the previous works as described above, our method proposed in this article is effective for mining putative gene regulations from microarray profiles. However, the traditional association rule analysis implicitly assumes that all items have similar importance without considering their significance in the data. Regardless, this is often not the case in real-life applications. Therefore, a number of researchers have proposed weight-based or multiple support-based association rule mining to engage this problem in a transaction database. Nevertheless, traditionally weighted or multiple supportbased association rule mining techniques only take into account the importance of each item. In a number of real-life case, the degree of importance is dependent on relationships between items. Both techniques never consider the relation intensity between any two items. For this reason, we propose the REMMAR (RElationalbased Multiple Minimum supports Association Rules) algorithm, which adjusts the minimum relation support (MRS) for each paired item dependent on the relation intensity, to discover the rules that have stronger biological meaning. In a real case study, we used the shortest distance between any two genes in the gene regulatory network (GRN) as the relation importance. Two real S.cerevisiae microarray datasets were used to evaluate the comparison results between the traditional association rule mining method and the proposed algorithm. The remainder of this article is organized as follows: Section 2 provides a brief review of traditional association rule mining and presents the proposed method; Section 3 consists of the application of the approach to S.cerevisiae datasets, to study the significance of the discovered rules. Finally, in Section 4, we present a conclusion regarding our findings.In this study, we proposed the REMMAR algorithm to tackle the inefficiency of previous methods, which never took into account the importance of each item. Moreover, for discovering more meaningful rules in biology, the proposed REMMAR would adjust the MRS for each individual gene pair according to the intensities of two neighboring genes in the PPIN. Not only did we improve the traditional association algorithm with a multiple support mechanism called REMMAR, but it was also applied on two yeast datasets for mining association genes in different conditions. The shortest distance between any two genes in the GRN was used as the relation importance in this study. In the first part of the result evaluation, the proposed method not only generated more rules with stronger relation intensity, but also filtered rules without biological meaning in the PPIN. In the second part of the evaluation, the part of the discovered rules was verified with biological literature. The proposed method has a precision of 100, whereas the reference Apriori method exhibits a precision of 87.5. Therefore, the proposed method is more effective in helping biologists explore the relationships of biological activities. 
