Discriminative and informative features for biomolecular text mining with ensemble feature selection Motivation: In the field of biomolecular text mining, black box behavior of machine learning systems currently limits understanding of the true nature of the predictions. However, feature selection (FS) is capable of identifying the most relevant features in any supervised learning setting, providing insight into the specific properties of the classification algorithm. This allows us to build more accurate classifiers while at the same time bridging the gap between the black box behavior and the end-user who has to interpret the results. Results: We show that our FS methodology successfully discards a large fraction of machine-generated features, improving classification performance of state-of-the-art text mining algorithms. Furthermore, we illustrate how FS can be applied to gain understanding in the predictions of a framework for biomolecular event extraction from text. We include numerous examples of highly discriminative features that model either biological reality or common linguistic constructs. Finally, we discuss a number of insights from our FS analyses that will provide the opportunity to considerably improve upon current text mining tools.Biomedical text mining tools are crucial to process the vast amount of information currently buried in millions of scientific articles. During the last decade, natural language processing (NLP) techniques have been implemented and successfully employed to extract proteinprotein interactions and genedisease associations . Recently, a more extensive event extraction challenge has been proposed during the BioNLP09 Shared Task . The goal of this challenge is to reliably extract several fundamental biological events from text. These events concern protein metabolism (e.g. transcription and catabolism), protein modification (e.g. phosphorylation) and fundamental molecular events (e.g. binding and localization). Furthermore, regulatory events and causal relations are represented by specific regulation events. This extraction challenge provides the opportunity to model more complex regulatory pathways than ever before. However, the increased complexity of the challenge severely degrades the predictive capabilities of existing text mining algorithms. The BioNLP09 Shared Task provides the community with standardized evaluation measures on a publicly available dataset, enabling a meaningful comparison between various systems. Analysis of the official results of the 24 participating groups has indicated that supervised machine learning (ML) systems using support vector machines (SVMs) dominate the top-ranked systems . The most popular approach, using carefully designed rules, generally provides higher precision . However, SVMs can also be tuned to achieve such high levels of precision, while maintaining high overall performance . As a consequence, SVMs are gaining popularity in the BioNLP community. Even though ML algorithms have been shown to achieve excellent performance, their typical characteristic of being a black box often prohibits the end-user to fully understand the nature of the predictions. This is definitely the case for event extraction from text, as typical datasets contain thousands of instances and thousands of features. Feature selection (FS) can help to gain more insight into this data abundance, by identifying features that are highly discriminative and marking these for the end-user. At the same time, this insight can be applied to develop more accurate NLP tools. In this article, we present the first extensive study of FS in the domain of BioNLP. Related work has mainly been involved with feature-type selection . In contrast, our study analyzes not only the contribution of different feature types, but also investigates the most important features within one specific type, revealing interesting results both from a linguistic and a biological point of view. This work builds on our previous study that included preliminary experiments using a much less advanced FS method . In Section 2 of this article, we first present the methods used for event extraction from text, feature generation, FS and classification. Next, we demonstrate the stability of our FS algorithm, present the classification results and analyze in depth the most discriminating features for various event types (Section 3). We will indicate how these results lead to more accurate models as well as provide interesting insights for the end-user. Finally, Section 4 summarizes the main conclusions of our work.This section presents the main results of our study. First, we discuss the results for FS stability (Section 3.1) and describe the classification results of the enhanced framework (Section 3.2). Further, Section 3.3 discusses the relative importance of the various feature types and finally, Section 3.4 offers many in-depth analyses of the discriminative power of individual features.plots the distribution of the FS stability in function of the number of bootstraps used for the consensus ranking. From this figure, it is clear that using more bootstraps to create the consensus ranking has a beneficial effect on the stability of the selected features. Even though there are still small gains, the stability improvements seem to saturate at about 60 bootstraps. While the figure is generated from the dataset on unary binding, similar graphs are obtained for the other six datasets (data not shown). The increase in stability from baseline to a 100 bootstrap consensus ranking is between 20 (on the transcription set) and 43 (on the protein catabolism set). More stable FS means less variation of the selected features, which has two main benefits. First of all, stable FS identifies more meaningful features and allows the construction of better performing classifiers (Section 3.2). Furthermore, it enhances the interpretability of the selected features (Sections 3.3 and 3.4). 
