Discriminatory power of RNA family models Motivation: RNA family models group nucleotide sequences that share a common biological function. These models can be used to find new sequences belonging to the same family. To succeed in this task, a model needs to exhibit high sensitivity as well as high specificity. As model construction is guided by a manual process, a number of problems can occur, such as the introduction of more than one model for the same family or poorly constructed models. We explore the Rfam database to discover such problems. Results: Our main contribution is in the definition of the discriminatory power of RNA family models, together with a first algorithm for its computation. In addition, we present calculations across the whole Rfam database that show several families lacking high specificity when compared to other families. We give a list of these clusters of families and provide a tentative explanation. Our program can be used to: (i) make sure that new models are not equivalent to any model already present in the database; and (ii) new models are not simply submodels of existing families.Structured non-coding RNAs are nucleotide sequences that are not translated into protein but have, in the folded state, their own specific functions . This function is very much dependent on the secondary and tertiary structure (the folded state), while on the other hand, the primary structure or sequence sees more change in the form of mutation. One can define relationships between non-coding RNAs in different species. A set of related sequences is called an RNA family. Each set is defined by its members performing the same function in different species. When genomes are sequenced, one is interested in finding members of known families in the new data, as well as finding new families if previously unknown non-coding RNAs are discovered. The problemfinding homologuesexists for proteins, too. Software to perform the same kind of searches exists in the form of HMMer and the Pfam database. Using profile hidden Markov models (profile HMMs), a mathematically convenient solution was found, around which the algorithms could be built. Unfortunately, the same solution proved inadequate for non-coding RNAs. The task of building a model that describes a new family is still a mostly manual process. Finding new members of existing families, on the other hand, can be performed using software. The problem we are discussing in this article applies equally well to other algorithms To whom correspondence should be addressed. human acgucg aacuaga cow accugg aacuaga dog acuugg aag uca cat acgucgaaacuaga structure .  to search for homologue sequences, but as our algorithm is specific toward an existing software package, namely Infernal , we will perform our analysis with respect to this software and the corresponding Rfam database. In order to model families of non-coding RNAs in a way that provides both sensitivity and specificity, the consensus secondary structure of the set of sequences has to be included in the mathematical model from which the algorithm is created. Stochastic context-free grammars provide access to such models, just as stochastic regular grammars (in the form of profile HMMs) can be used to model protein families. We begin with a succinct introduction to the process of first designing an Infernal RNA family model and then searching for new family members. Building on those algorithms, we can define the specificity of a given model compared to other known models in a natural way using the already established Infernal language of bit scores.The Rfam 9.1 database contains 1372 different models. All pairwise calculations lead to a total of 940 506 results. The time to calculate the score and string for each pair is typically less than one second, but of course depending on the size of the models in question. Of all pairs, about 70 000 are noteworthy with scores of 20 bit or more.shows the distribution of scores among all pairs of family models. Negative scores have been truncated towards zero as any score lower than this certainly means that the two models in question are separated very well. Among the high-scoring pairs are several interesting examples, some of which we will take a closer look at. Similar results for other models can be extracted from the data available for download. It is possible to generate, among others, model-centric views that show the high-scoring neighborhood of a particular model and global views that show high-scoring pairs. Asaptly demonstrates, clusters of families form early (in this case, only the 20 highest scoring edges are drawn).In Table 2, we have gathered some results. The 70 000 pair scores over 20 bit have been split according to the abstract shape of the secondary structures of the hit. A shape is a representation of the secondary structure that abstracts over stem and interior loop sizes. In this case, each pair of brackets defines one stem. Intervening unpaired nucleotides do not lead to the creation of a new stem. Hits such as _/_ are unstructured, but similar, sequences. The shape/is just one hairpin, while the two shapes [on the same string point to an interesting pair score as the string apparently folds into complex high-scoring structures that align well, too. In principle, it is possible that the common sequence folds into two different secondary structures. At abstract shape level 5 (the most abstract) this did not happen for the current Rfam database. Our algorithm, however, is capable to deal with such cases. Let us now take a closer look at two examples that are particularly interesting. The first was selected because RNaseP is a ubiquitous endoribonuclease and the second to highlight how problematic models can be discovered. 1st example: The RNaseP families for bacteria (type a and b) and archaea show weak separation as can be seen in. The three involved models (Rfam id 10, 11 and 373) have different noise cutoff scores. The noise cutoff is the highest score for a false hit in the Rfam NR database, scores above this threshold are likely homologues (cf.). For the three different RNaseP families, these scores are 43, 93 and 59 bit, respectively. A look atshows, that no random sequence could score high in both model 373 and 11, one can, at most, find a hit that is remote at best. The picture is entirely different for the high-scoring sequence between RNaseP,. Link scores for different RNaseP models (with noise cutoff (NC)) with weak separation. Values in brackets are the difference to the noise cutoff thresholds. The difference is as at least as high as given. A negative value means that in one or two of the models, the score was lower than the noise cutoff. For example, the Link score of 101 bit between bact_a and bact_b is 8 bit higher than the NC of bact_b. type a and RNaseP in archaea. Here, we find a sequence that is at least 41 bit higher than the noise cutoff. A similar picture presents itself for the sequence found for the two bacterial RNaseP models, though the score difference between the noise cutoff and the highest score is only 8 bit. The sequences and their scores show something else, too. In Section 2, we described how to generate many similar strings from the one returned string. In this case, where the gap between cutoff and score is as wide as 41 bit, we could indeed create a very large number of strings. Each of which with a score that makes it a likely hit. Additionally, the high scores between the three RNaseP models are somehow expected, given that all three models describe variants of RNaseP. Nuclear RNaseP (not shown), on the other hand, is well separated from these three models with a maximal score of 24 bit. 2nd example: For our second example , we have chosen a set of four family models. Each presents with not only a high Link score with regard to the others but also the scores are over the noise cutoff threshold by a large margin, too. i457Page: i458 i453i459. A high-scoring set of families, explicitly selected for the large difference to the noise cutoff value. Models 1259 and 943 score 135 bit on some input, which is at least 76 bit higher than the respective noise cutoff value. Notice, too, that not all pairs show such a behavior. Models 1086 and 943 have a high Link score with 123 bit, but at least the noise cutoff value is higher than this value (by 26 bit), making a hit less likely in one model. Some of the models were built using very few seed sequences and this seems to increase the chance of finding weak models.We have presented a polynomial-time algorithm that, for any two covariance models, returns a string that scores high in both models. Using this algorithm, several questions regarding RNA family models can be answered. First, it is possible to determine if a model has high discriminative power against other models. This is important to avoid false positive results when searching for previously unknown new family members. The discriminative power can be quantified using the same measure as used in Infernal itself, thereby giving answers in a language, namely bit scores, that makes comparisons possible and easy. Second, if a model shows overlap with another, it can be determined which regions of the model do actually show this behaviour. This is possible, as we not only return a score value, but other information, too. This includes the offending string, the respective secondary structures and a detailed score account. Third, the algorithm is extendable. Borrowing ideas from Algebraic Dynamic Programming , an optimization algebra can be anything that follows the dynamic programming constraints. Included are the CYK scoring algebra and the different information functions as well as an algebra product operation. Additional algebras require roughly a dozen lines of code. Fourth, the MaxiMin, or Link score lends itself as a natural similarity score for RNA families. Closely related families, in terms of primary and secondary structurenot necessarily biological closeness, show a higher Link score than others. This requires further investigation to determine how much biological information can be extracted. Pure mathematics cannot answer which biological relation does actually exist. In the case of prospective meta-families, we have two open research problems. One is to take a closer look at high-scoring families to determine their biological relationship. Are high scores an artifact of poorly designed families, or a case of an actual metafamily? The other problem became evident in the 1st example, where not all members of the RNaseP family scored high against each other. This suggests that meta-families cannot be modeled in Infernal directly, but how to adapt RNA family models in such a case remains open. Researchers designing new families will also find value in the tool, as one can scan a new family model against existing ones to be more confident that one has indeed identified a new family and not an already existing one in disguise. The Infernal Users Guide mentions homology between family models as a reason for the existence of the different cutoff scores for noise, gathering and trusted. We think it is important to be able to determine, computationally, the importance of the cutoff scores when assigning new hits to families. Another fact is that cutoff scores, like the models themselves, are set by the curators of the family. Our scoring scheme relies on the Infernal scoring algorithm itself. As numbers of models were created from very few seed sequences it is possible that the relevant cutoff scores are set too high to capture remote members. A cutoff score above the highest pair scores involving such a model could be of help while scanning new genomes for remote family members. Finally, we have to acknowledge that Infernal uses the Inside-, not the CYK-algorithm to determine final scores. This can pose a problem in certain exceptional circumstances but these should be rare. Mathematically (cf.), CYK = Prob(s,m), while Inside = Prob(sm). The CYK algorithm gives the score for the single best alignment of sequence s and model m while the Inside algorithm sums up over all possible alignments. This just means that we underestimate the final score, or said otherwise, the Inside scores for the Link sequence given the corresponding models will be even higher than the CYK scores. 
