Databases and ontologies DIVE: a data intensive visualization engine Modern scientific investigation is generating increasingly larger datasets, yet analyzing these data with current tools is challenging. DIVE is a software framework intended to facilitate big data analysis and reduce the time to scientific insight. Here, we present features of the framework and demonstrate DIVEs application to the Dynameomics project, looking specifically at two proteins. Availability and implementation: Binaries and documentation are available at http://www.dynameomics.org/DIVE/DIVESetup.exe.The advent of massive networked computing resources has enabled virtually unlimited data collection, storage and analysis from low-cost genome sequencing, high-precision molecular dynamics simulations and high-definition imaging data for radiology, to name just a few examples. This explosion of big data is changing traditional scientific methods; instead of relying on experiments to output relatively small targeted datasets, data mining techniques are being used to analyze data stores with the intent of learning from the data patterns themselves. Unfortunately, data analysis and integration in large data storage environments is challenging even for experienced scientists. Furthermore, most existing domain-specific tools designed for complex heterogeneous datasets are not equipped to visually analyze big data. DIVE is a software framework designed for exploring large, heterogeneous, high-dimensional datasets using a visual analytics approach (Supplementary). Visual analytics is a big data exploration methodology emphasizing the iterative process between human intuition, computational analyses and visualization. DIVEs visual analytics approach integrates with traditional methods, creating an environment that supports data exploration and discovery.The impetus for DIVE was data mining the Dynameomics dataset (Van der). Dynameomics is a large data-intensive project that contains atomistic molecular dynamics (MD) simulations of the native state and unfolding pathways of representatives of essentially all protein folds . These protein simulations and associated biophysical analyses are stored in a mixed data warehouse and file system environment distributed over multiple servers containing hundreds of terabytes of data and410 4 times as many structures as the Protein Data Bank , representing the largest collection of protein structures and protein simulations in the world. In the domain of structural biology, Dynameomics exemplifies the challenges of big data. Here, we present DIVE applications involving two proteins where specialized modules built on the DIVE framework are used to accelerate biophysical analysis. To whom correspondence should be addressed. 
