Structural bioinformatics DockAFM: benchmarking protein structures by docking under AFM topographs Proteins can adopt a variety of conformations. We present a simple server for scoring the agreement between 3D atomic structures and experimental envelopes obtained by atomic force micros-copy. Three different structures of immunoglobulins (IgG) or blood coagulation factor V activated were tested and their agreement with several topographical surfaces was computed. This approach can be used to test structural variability within a family of proteins. Availability and implementation: DockAFM is available at http://Two examples are presented in. In the first case, AFM images of single molecules of antibodies were obtained. The question asked to DockAFM server was to show which known 3D structures of complete antibodies (PDB codes for T-shape: 1IGT, Y-shape: 1IGY or intermediate: 1HZH) fit better the AFM images. In the second case, AFM image of human blood coagulation factor V activated (FVa) was obtained. To whom correspondence should be addressed.Because no complete structure of FVa exists, the question asked to DockAFM is to show which of the three available model of FVa fits better the AFM image. The three models used for FVa are a comparative model, 1FV4 , a partial crystal structure, 1SDD and a more recent completed FVa model, which uses the C domains orientations according to the partial crystal structure, FVa . Both AFM images were obtained on a multimode V microscope using the PeakForce tapping mode in air (Bruker, AXS). The IgG image was scaled four times by linear interpolation to a resolution of 4.9 A /px using Gwyddion, whereas the FVa image was used at the raw resolution of 9.75 A /px. For the docking, a cubic matrix of 64 nodes with a step of 4.9 A and a favorable layer of 12 A was used for IgG, whereas a cubic matrix of 32 nodes with a step of 9.75 A and a favorable layer of 20 A was used for FVa. Among the multiple individual molecules on the AFM images, several were cropped and selected. Each tested structure was docked individually in each crop image. Results for a single crop in both molecular systems are shown in, full information is available in Supplementary Material (Supplementary Figs S1 and S2). The output of DockAFM is indicated in. For each crop and for each structure, docking energy and the offset relative to the center is given. Best docking solutions are highlighted in yellow (first column). Docking solutions having acceptable offsets are highlighted in cyan (second column), i.e. those with a maximum deviation between the center of the docked molecule and that of the topographic image was525 of the image lateral size. Finally, the most probable fitted structures are highlighted in green (third column) and correspond to those having the lowest energy with well centering into the topographic surface. In the two cases presented here, the structure 1IGT is the most probable conformation found in the IgG image, whereas the model 1FV4 fits better the FVa AFM image.show each individual topographic surface used for running DockAFM (b) AFM topographic surfaces used for docking protein structures are shown in gray scale as well as three different docked structures are shown for both IgG and FVa systems (bottom side view) (c) For each system, the docking score as well as the shift of the docked structure from the center of the topographic surface are shown. The most favorable structure is chosen as that having the smallest shift from the center. Counting most favorable structures is used for the benchmarking purpose of DockAFM 
