Systems biology DualAligner: a dual alignment-based strategy to align protein interaction networks Motivation: Given the growth of large-scale proteinprotein interaction (PPI) networks obtained across multiple species and conditions , network alignment is now an important research problem. Network alignment performs comparative analysis across multiple PPI networks to understand their connections and relationships. However, PPI data in high-throughput experiments still suffer from significant false-positive and false-negatives rates. Consequently, high-confidence network alignment across entire PPI networks is not possible. At best, local network alignment attempts to alleviate this problem by completely ignoring low-confidence mappings; global network alignment, on the other hand, pairs all proteins regardless. To this end, we propose an alternative strategy: instead of full alignment across the entire network or completely ignoring low-confidence regions, we aim to perform highly specific protein-to-protein alignments where data confidence is high, and fall back on broader functional region-to-region alignment where detailed pro-teinprotein alignment cannot be ascertained. The basic idea is to provide an alignment of multiple granularities to allow biological predictions at varying specificity. Results: DualAligner performs dual network alignment, in which both region-to-region alignment, where whole subgraph of one network is aligned to subgraph of another, and protein-to-protein alignment , where individual proteins in networks are aligned to one another, are performed to achieve higher accuracy network alignments. Dual network alignment is achieved in DualAligner via background information provided by a combination of Gene Ontology annotation information and protein interaction network data. We tested DualAligner on the global networks from IntAct and demonstrated the superiority of our approach compared with state-of-the-art network alignment methods. We studied the effects of parameters in DualAligner in controlling the quality of the alignment. We also performed a case study that illustrates the utility of our approach. Availability and implementation:Proteinprotein interaction (PPI) network models the cooperation between proteins to drive processes within a biological system. Advancement in high-throughput technologies has led to rapid growth of large scale PPI networks obtained across multiple species or conditions, and therefore, comparative analysis to understand their connections and relationships is now an important research problem . To this end, the network alignment problem aims to align a set of PPI networks belonging to different species to find conserved subnetworks within them. These conserved regions could explain mechanisms of function conservation and evolution beyond what is available to individual gene studies. The network alignment problem consists of two key steps: a scoring framework that captures the knowledge about module evolution and identification of high scoring alignments (conserved subnetworks or modules) from among exponentially large set of possible alignments. Unfortunately, finding conserved subnetworks in a group of networks is NP-Hard . Consequently, a range of heuristicbased network alignment methods have been proposed that fall into two categories, namely, local and global network alignment . The local network alignment approach identifies multiple unrelated conserved regions between the input networks, each region implying a mapping independent of others. It is particularly useful in finding known functional components (pathways, complexes) in a new species. For instance, PathBLAST aligns linear pathways based on homology and interaction confidence. NetworkBLAST-M finds highly conserved local regions greedily using inferred phylogeny. Another local alignment method is MaWish , which is modeled on evolution of protein interactions. On the other hand, the global network alignment approach aligns every node in the smaller network to the larger network to find best overall alignment between the input networks. Particularly, it enables species-level comparisons and discovery of functional orthologs. For instance, IsoRank and IsoRankN identify a stationary random walk distribution to perform global network alignment. Graemlin 2.0 uses a training set of alignments to learn phylogeny relationships before performing an To whom correspondence should be addressed. alignment. MI-GRAAL is an alignment framework that could integrate multiple similarity measures to construct a global alignment.model global network alignment as a graph matching problem with hard constraints given by a set of must-link pairs of proteins. These must-link pairs are identified by sequence orthologs. More recently, the ILP-based Natalie proposes a Lagrangian relaxation approach to solve the problem approximately . PINALOG combines both the similarities of protein sequence and protein function to compute an alignment between two PPI networks . To this end, the Gene Ontology (GO) function similarity and sequence similarity are obtained independently and then combined using a linear combination of the independent similarities weighted by a factor. Despite considerable progress made by the bioinformatics community in devising high-quality network alignment strategies, state-of-the-art network alignment techniques suffer from a key drawback. Specifically, they depend on protein sequence similarity to facilitate network alignment. Unfortunately, sequence similarity is only relevant to a subset of highly conserved proteins, leaving significant network regions poorly specified by sequence homology. Furthermore, it is well known that structural information of PPI networks suffers either from high falsepositive rate of current high-throughput experiments or from false negatives because of incomplete data . Consequently, in significant regions of a network, highconfidence alignment of proteins is not possible. At best, local network alignment attempts to alleviate this problem by completely ignoring low-confidence mappings; global network alignment, on the other hand, pairs all proteins regardless. In this article, we address the aforementioned limitation by taking a GO annotation-driven dual alignment (Here dual refers to the two-step alignment process and not duality in optimization) strategy to align a pair of PPI networks. Instead of only performing protein-to-protein alignments, we perform high granularity protein-to-protein alignment where confidence is high and more general functional region-to-region alignment where detailed proteinprotein alignment cannot be ascertained, which may still yield biologically informative conclusions. Consequently, our method not only aligns highly conserved protein pairs but also aligns functional subgraphs of one network to functional subgraphs of another. Informally, a functional subgraph is a connected component of the network whose nodes share a particular biological role or function (annotated using GO). The region-to-region and protein-to-protein alignments in our dual alignment strategy are not independent of each other, but inextricably linked. Specifically, region-to-region alignment sets the foundation for broad associations between functional regions. On the other hand, protein-to-protein alignment specifies detailed associations between nodes within each associated regions.illustrates with an example on how functionally conserved subgraphs are first aligned, followed by alignment of the underlying interaction structure. First, functional subgraphs of the networks are identified. For instance, a subgraph that shares the transport role is identified in the human network. Alignment between pairs of functional subgraphs is carried out and high-confidence pairs are identified based on the structural and sequence similarities of their underlying subgraphs. For instance, f 2 in(c) depicts an alignment between the transport-associated subgraph and microtubule binding-associated subgraph, highlighting the connection between the regions. Using region-to-region alignments, we model each region-to-region pair as soft constraints that probabilistically restrict protein-to-protein alignment within the regions. Following that, protein-to-protein alignments are computed using these soft constraints as priors. We refer to the aforementioned network alignment model as function-constrained network alignment (The first step, i.e. regionto-region alignment, represents function constraints that restricts the second step, i.e. protein-to-protein alignment; detailed in Section 2). It is worth mentioning the salient feature of our model. By integrating the rich set of functional information as soft constraints with the hard constraints (e.g. known orthologs) in the alignment framework, our dual alignment strategy not only limits the search space of unconstrained alignment to low knowledge regions but also guides alignment of functionally informative regions under a reduced search space. Consequently, our approach identifies a suitable alignment from a smaller search space compared with stateof-the-art network alignment techniques, an important feature because of intractable nature of the network alignment problem. Additionally, by leveraging soft constraints, we have much lesserfine-grained protein-to-protein alignment using the aligned regions in (c) as background information. Protein-to-protein alignments are soft constrained within subgraphsubgraph pairs, that is, any alignment between two proteins is probabilistically restricted within one or more subgraphsubgraph pairs in (c) likelihood of generating alignments that conflict with known biological functions. Compared with network-based approach, our approach considers both structural and functional information in defining subgraphs. Network-based methods rely purely on the assumption that densely connected proteins are likely to share similar function, and vice versa. However, there are cases where this assumption does not hold. In regulatory and signaling pathways, for example, proteins share similar function without being densely connected. An example is the MAPKKK cascade pathway. Such subgraphs can be uncovered via GO annotations but not topology alone because it is sparsely connected compared with protein complexes. To realize the function-constrained network alignment problem, we propose an algorithm called DualAligner that uses the aforementioned dual alignment strategy, where region-toregion alignments are first made followed by detailed proteinto-protein alignment. Region-to-region alignment establishes high-level functional connections between the networks, while protein-to-protein alignment specifies the detailed connections within them. We demonstrate the utility and superiority of DualAligner over the state-of-the-art global network alignment techniques using real-world PPI networks in Section 3.The DualAligner algorithm is implemented in Scala. We now present the experiments conducted to study the performance of DualAligner and report some of the results here (additional results are in Supplementary Material S1.6). The experiments were conducted on a 1.66 GHz Intel Core 2 Duo T5450 machine with 3 GB memory. We align the PPI networks of the global human, fly and yeast . We use GO annotations that are part of the IntAct species dataset. No other annotations were used. Evaluation criteria. We use several criteria to evaluate the performance of DualAligner. We define the coverage of an alignment m between two networks G 1 and G 2 , denoted as cov(m), as the fraction of protein pairs aligned by an alignment method. That is, covm=jmj=minjV 1 j; jV 2 j, where jmj is the number of protein pairs aligned in m. Observe that cov(m) = 1 if the alignment m is a one-to-one mapping of V 1 to V 2. To measure the structural similarity of an alignment m between two networks G 1 and G 2 with covm 1, we propose a modified version of the edge correctness (EC) measure . Given G 1 , G 2 and alignment m, the EC measure is defined as EC= E1SETE2SET region-to-region alignment statistics in Supplementary Material S1.3). Each pair of subgraphs separated by the dashed lines represents a functional subgraph of the human network matched to its yeast network counterpart. Observe that while several regionto-region alignments contain a high-confidence one-to-one protein alignments, such as the conserved NAT1-ARD1-NATS acetyltransferase subgraph, other region-to-region alignments do not admit a proper one-to-one protein alignment. Furthermore, the COG complex, which plays an important role in intra-Golgi trafficking, is well conserved between yeast and human network. However, COG1, COG2 and COG7 are structurally unique to mammalian cells and are not homologous to their yeast counterpart , which imply that no individual pairing between COG1, COG2 and COG7 could exist. This partially explains the minor differences between the subgraphs and also justifying the need for region-to-region alignment in addition to individual protein-to-protein alignment. We also note that the proteosome core complex is conserved. This complex is known to be ubiquitous and highly conserved in eukaryotes. Other relationships can be inferred from well-aligned subgraphs. For instance, transport mechanisms are found to be highly conserved between human and yeast. In summary, well-aligned regions show important conservation relationships between complexcomplex, complexfunction and function process. Global protein-to-protein alignment. Next, we compare the performance of DualAligner with the following state-of-the-art global network alignment methods: IsoRank , IsoRankN , MI-GRAAL , Natalie , PINALOG , Shih2012 and PISwap . We ran alignments between the global yeast and human networks as well as between the global fly and yeast networks. We set min = 3, s = 0.8 and s = 0.9. We vary the parameter k to obtain alignments of varying coverage. For IsoRank and IsoRankN, we used the standard settings recommended by the tool with = 0.8. We use the default parameters for PINALOG, and for Natalie we chose the setting with highest EC value. For MI-GRAAL, we enabled signatures, sequences and degrees cost matrices. To use PISwap as an independent method, we use the Hungarian method to obtain a best matching based on sequence homology as input. For Shih2012, we set trade-off parameter to 50. Note that PATH suffers from scalability problem as highlighted in , and as a result it failed to complete the alignment of the human and yeast global networks within 24 h.plots the results of the alignment between the global human and yeast networks, comparing DualAligner to existing methods. In each figure, the scores obtained using DualAligner are indicated by a line because we obtain multiple instances of network alignments with different coverage. While no methods are superior on all measures, DualAligner is among the best performer in each measure (when compared with another method having the same coverage). It achieves the best balance of edge correctness, sequence similarity and functional coherence by being the best or close to the best performer in each measure. DualAligner outperforms all methods except MI-GRAAL based on EC. On the other hand, DualAligner significantly outperforms MI-GRAAL based on average normalized bit-score. It also outperforms all methods in functional coherence. Notice that at lower coverage, DualAligner even outperforms other methods in both measures. Finally, DualAligner outperforms Natalie, PINALOG, IsoRank and PISwap on all measures. Thus, our approach can be used to obtain high-quality alignments if maximizing coverage is not a requirement.plots the results of alignment between the global fly and yeast networks. Similar to the preceding comparison, DualAligner is either the best performer or close to the bestSelected region-to-region alignments showing highly conserved subgraphs between human and yeast networks. Note that there may not necessarily be an optimal protein-to-protein alignment between the subgraphs on all measures. It achieves the best score in FC except PINALOG. Nevertheless, we urge caution in interpreting the quality of the protein-to-protein alignments. The global fly network is highly incomplete and has large gaps in interaction data . This could also explain the low coverage of PINALOG, which rely on topology-based clustering to align the networks. The rapid drop in EC and bit-score similarities at higher coverage is indicative of this issue. In this case, a broad region-to-region alignment would be more suitable than inferring detailed protein-to-protein alignment out of the incomplete interaction data. Finally, compared with other methods, DualAligner is able to assign confidence scores to matched protein pairs that correlate with alignment quality (by EC, bit-score and functional coherence measures). This is demonstrated by its ability to allow users to control the trade-off between alignment coverage and quality. Overall, DualAligner is competitive with all proteinto-protein methods while being able to perform region-to-region alignment that is consistent with existing knowledge. Note that the fly network is sparsely connected with few GO annotations in comparison with the human network. Hence, the sequence homology of proteins may be crucial here for better alignment. Consequently, PISwap is advantageous here, as it relies on sequence-based Hungarian matching. A unique advantage of DualAligner is its ability to have functionally interpretable subgraph-to-subgraph alignments. Methods that are based on clustering (e.g. PINALOG and Shih2012) may not yield functionally interpretable subgraphto-subgraph alignment. DualAligner is especially advantageous when there is no clear one-to-one protein alignment between the subgraphs. In that case, functional interpretation of alignment between regions can be useful. On both alignments, DualAligner is able to achieve almost complete coverage. Thus, despite not considering isolated proteins, a significant portion of the networks can be aligned. Effect of s. The parameter s controls the effect of sequence similarity versus topology similarity in the scoring model. We study the effect of s on the alignments by varying s from 0 to 400.depicts the results showing its effect on EC and ANBS scores. As s increases, the EC value improves while ANBS decreases. Thus, s allows a trade-off between sequence similarity and topology similarity. At low values of s , more emphasis in preserving high average bit-score alignment is observed. The greater the value s , the greater is the effect of topology similarity. This effect, however, converges to a steady state at subsequently higher values. Running times.reports the running times of DualAligner compared with other methods. Observe that DualAligner outperforms the tested approaches except PISwap. Although IsoRankN is designed to scale to multiple networks, IsoRank significantly outperforms IsoRankN in alignment of a pair of global PPI networks. However, the running times of IsoRank increase much more rapidly with the size of the networks. In comparison, DualAligner scales better with the size of the networks. The Natalie method is designed to terminate after 3600 s. 
