Gene expression DvD: An R/Cytoscape pipeline for drug repurposing using public repositories of gene expression data Multiple methods based on matching gene expression signatures have been proposed to identify anti-correlated drug and disease profiles . The central paradigm is that a drug compound, which shows the opposite effect on gene expression to the observed for a disease could be used to treat that particular disease. These methods have resulted in hypotheses of differential uses (repurposing) for existing compounds that have been validated experimentally. This highlights the potential power of mining existing safe compounds for repurposing, which does not require the expensive and extensive initial design and clinical phases of drug discovery. It is expected that analysing new and existing data from public repositories such as Array Express (www.ebi.ac.uk/arrayexpress/), Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) (www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/) and the Connectivity Map (CMap) (www.broadinstitute.org/cmap/) using these methods will become increasingly popular in computational drug discovery . Motivated by this, we have developed Drug versus Disease (DvD), an R package to match drug and disease profiles. This is done by making use of gene set enrichment analysis and visualizing the final results in networks containing clusters of similar drugs and diseases. DvD differs from existing web servers and databases (such as ProfileChaser, MARQ and SPIED, see Supplementary Material) in that it can dynamically access both Array Express and GEO to generate input profiles. With DvD, users can automatically compare input profiles to reference drug data from CMap and disease profiles curated from GEO. This reference data has associated networks where, unlike similar tools, drugs or diseases exerting similar effects on transcription are grouped into clusters. DvD is flexible, offering customizable and default data options for the input profiles and the reference data. The Cytoscape (www.cytoscape.org/) plug-in provides a user interface to the full DvD pipeline, as well as a visualization platform for the results. In the final networks, drug or disease nodes are linked to the DrugBank (www.drugbank.ca/) and Medical Subject Headings (MeSH) (www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/mesh/) web browsers, respectively.To illustrate the use of DvD in drug repurposing we analysed several disease datasets available from GEO. We compared them with the 1309 compounds in the CMap using DvD and considered significant those connections with q-value50.05. A prostate cancer profile (gse17906) had seven significant matches with five being negative . The strongest negative correlation was with Estradiol, a known treatment for prostate cancer. For a breast cancer profile (gse5847), we found the third highest inverse correlation with Tamoxifen, a similarly well-known treatment for breast cancer. The compound scoring highest was Ranitidine, a Histamine receptor type-2 (H2) antagonist, which has previously analysed as a potential treatment for breast cancer . Finally, we analysed a type II diabetes profile (gse15653) and found Phenformin and Torasemide at the seventh and ninth highest therapeutic scores, respectively. Interestingly, Finasteride scored higher than both of these known treatments for type II diabetes, with the third strongest negative correlation. Finasteride inhibits the type-2 5 alphareductase enzyme, which converts testosterone to dihydrotestosterone. Testosterone is known to be important in glucose homeostasis and lipid metabolism . These results were not obtained when analysing these three profiles using CMap (Supplementary Material), showing the value in combining replicate experiments to generate profiles for comparison. 
