Data and text mining A framework for analytical characterization of monoclonal antibodies based on reactivity profiles in different tissues Motivation: Monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) are among the most powerful and important tools in biology and medicine. MAb development is of great significance to many research and clinical applications. Therefore, objective mAb classification is essential for categorizing and comparing mAb panels based on their reactivity patterns in different cellular species. However, typical flow cytometric mAb profiles present unique modeling challenges with their non-Gaussian features and intersample variations. It makes accurate mAb classification difficult to do with the currently used kernel-based or hierarchical clustering techniques. Results: To address these challenges, in the present study we developed a formal two-step framework called mAbprofiler for systematic, parametric characterization of mAb profiles. Further, we measured the reactivity of hundreds of new antibodies in diverse tissues using flow cytometry, which we successfully classified using mAbprofiler. First, mAbprofiler fits a mAbs flow cytometric histogram with a finite mixture model of skew t distributions that is robust against non-Gaussian features, and constructs a precise, smooth and mathematically rigorous profile. Then it performs novel curve clustering of the fitted mAb profiles using a skew t mixture of non-linear regression model that can handle intersample variation. Thus, mAbprofiler provides a new framework for identifying robust mAb classes, all well defined by distinct parametric templates, which can be used for classifying new mAb samples. We validated our classification results both computationally and empirically using mAb profiles of known classification.Monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) are among the most powerful, popular and important tools in a biomedical laboratory for probing different cellular types, states and functions. Research in the past decades has led to the development of large collections of mAb for specific binding to cell surface antigens, which facilitated purification and functional characterization of a variety of cell populations. It also unlocked the great potential of using mAb for therapy in many serious diseases such as cancer. Using platforms such as flow cytometry, one can measure quantitatively the binding of a mAb, in single cell resolution, to the corresponding antigen whose expression may serve as a marker of cellular characteristics for a given specimen, see. Therefore, it is important to characterize mAb reactivity patterns in different cell types and tissues with analytical precision and rigor so that both known and new mAb can be categorized and compared accurately and objectively. MAb classification is of great practical importance to many fields in biomedicine such as immunology, hematology, pathology and clinical immunotherapy. Large-scale attempts at analyzing mAb to identify new molecules were pioneered in the human leukocyte differentiation antigens (HLDAs) workshops [see review in Zola andwhere the reactivities of large panels of mAbs were measured against widely available cell lines. The reactivity was given a binary assignment compared with a negative controleither the antibody bound to its antigen on a given cell or it did notas measured by fluorescence intensity. The frequency with which this occurred over a cell population was then recorded, and hierarchical clustering was employed to group similar reactivity thus was born the Clusters of Differentiation (CD) classes, widely used today to identify various cell populations . In recent years, the workshop approach for identifying new molecules to define cell types has become less applicable due to the current capabilities of molecular identification at gene level . An alternative approach for mAb characterization involves the use of primary cell populations thatFollowing data preparation and preprocessing, in Step 1, mAbprofiler modeled cytometric histograms for 561 mAb samples from six tissues using skew t mixture models.illustrates how a profile (shown as gray curve) constructed by mAbprofiler offers a smooth and precise representation of mAb density histograms. This can be contrasted with the original cytometric input in the form of highly non-smooth patterns as shown in Supplementary. To rigorously assess the precision of modeling with our skew t mixture models (STMIX), we computed log-likelihood maxima, BIC values, the distances D n between the data and the fitted model (based on KolmogorovSmirnov test) and CPU times for STMIX as well as for two competing models of more commonly used mixtures of Gaussian (NMIX) and t distributions (TMIX), and compared them in Supplementary Table S1. Clearly, as shown by BIC, mAbprofiler gives the best fit. In Step 2, for each tissue, mAbprofiler clustered the mAb profiles, specified as density curves, with our new algorithm for non-linear regression of skew t mixture models. It selected the model that corresponded to the optimal tissue-specific group structure using the maximal value of the Jump statistic over a range of clusters (g = 1,2...,g max ).summarizes the results of this clustering step. The optimal choice of g over the values for which the EM converged is marked inand Supplementary(right panel). Inf, we show each of the six clusters of the spleen profiles. Notably, the profiles were grouped by their significant features overcoming intersample variation. Thus, the clustering was both accurate and robust. Further,shows the mean profile of every cluster in its own color, thereby contrasting the signature templates for every class while summarizing the characteristicFor each tissue-type, its count of mAb profiles, number of profile clusters (i.e. mAb classes), IIR (average intracluster distance to average intercluster distance ratio) and computing time (CT, in minutes) of the EM algorithm for g = 1,2...,g max .features within each of them. Similar joint plots for every tissue are shown in Supplementary, which also includes the Jump statistics that help in the determination of the optimal group structures. We validated our mAb classification both computationally and empirically. Since every fitted profile is defined by a probability distribution, we computed a symmetric form of KullbackLeibler distance (sKL) between all pairs of profiles, and observed that the average intracluster distances between profiles are considerably lower than the average intercluster distances. The ratio (IIR) in every tissue is shown in. For illustration, the distance matrix for the six clusters for spleen is shown in Supplementary. For empirical validation, for four tissue types (spleen, thymocytes, bone marrow and lymph node) and two classes of antibodies [class I mAb T2/39 and anti-LFA-1 mAb F10-150 as described in], we generated data for two pairs of mAb such that the mAb within each pair were known to target molecules of the same class, but across pairs, they targeted molecules from distinct classes. As shown in Supplementary, indeed all profile pairs (black thin curves) cluster together within each class (Class I in left panel or anti-LFA-1 in right panel), but separately across two distinct classes, providing experimental evidence for precise and objective classification by our framework. As in, the mean profiles are Page: 2751 27462753shown in cluster-specific colors for distinguishing the two classes in each tissue. 
