Genetics and population analysis Enriching targeted sequencing experiments for rare disease alleles Motivation: Next-generation targeted resequencing of genome-wide association study (GWAS)-associated genomic regions is a common approach for follow-up of indirect association of common alleles. However, it is prohibitively expensive to sequence all the samples from a well-powered GWAS study with sufficient depth of coverage to accurately call rare genotypes. As a result, many studies may use next-generation sequencing for single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) discovery in a smaller number of samples, with the intent to genotype candidate SNPs with rare alleles captured by resequencing. This approach is reasonable, but may be inefficient for rare alleles if samples are not carefully selected for the resequencing experiment. Results: We have developed a probability-based approach, SampleSeq, to select samples for a targeted resequencing experiment that increases the yield of rare disease alleles substantially over random sampling of cases or controls or sampling based on genotypes at associated SNPs from GWAS data. This technique allows for smaller sample sizes for resequencing experiments, or allows the capture of rarer risk alleles. When following up multiple regions, SampleSeq selects subjects with an even representation of all the regions. SampleSeq also can be used to calculate the sample size needed for the resequencing to increase the chance of successful capture of rare alleles of desired frequencies.Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) are based on the premise that densely genotyped common alleles will have statistical power to detect causal associations with traits at nearby, ungenotyped common mutations through short-range linkage disequilibrium (LD). The basis for this strategy is the common disease common variant (CDCV) hypothesis . This approach has been proven to be effective in many scenarios for mapping small genomic regions to traits (see the National Human Genome To whom correspondence should be addressed.For all simulated scenarios, we calculated the number of rare disease alleles captured. For the CDRV scenarios, where the allele frequency of the trait locus is well-estimated, the SampleSeq algorithm consistently provided higher yields of captured disease alleles than the other methods for all sample size thresholds (4, Supplementary Tables S14). These results demonstrate the benefit in efficiency that SampleSeq can provide over the other alternatives. The yield of rare disease alleles provided by SampleSeq is a little higher over all sample sizes than by ranking case subjects by their burden of risk alleles. The other three alternative approaches were less efficient than SampleSeq by large percentages. Among the four alternative approaches, those relying on the burden of the proxy marker risk alleles were better than those not using this information, and those focusing on cases were better than those not limited to cases. These results are as expected as both the burden of marker risk alleles and disease status are informative for the likelihood of carrying real disease variants. As SampleSeq is able to appropriately combine these two pieces of information, it often results in a more efficient selection of subjects than the alternatives. When only one piece of information was used, using the burden of proxy marker alleles performed similarly to the random selection of cases, with the former being slightly better when the prevalence was K = 0.01 and 0.05 and the latter slightly better when K = 0.1 and 0.2. We also observed that as trait prevalence increased, the total number of captured rare disease alleles decreased (Supplementary Tables S14). This was due to the fact that the same number of disease variants with similar effects would account for a high fraction of heritability for a low prevalence disease than for a high prevalence disease, which resulted in a higher likelihood for a patient of a low prevalence disease to carry a disease variant in the targeted regions in our simulations. We also simulated a single region of size 1 Mb with a single disease variant; the results followed the same pattern (data not shown). We note that SampleSeq is sensitive to very low values of p d as the algorithm is involved with solving linear equations, for which the solutions will be highly variable due to nearly singular matrices at very small values of p d. Our experience is that p d should be at leastthe maximum possible disease alleles over all sample sizes. In our simulated scenario, the random selection of cases performed much better than using the burden of proxy marker alleles. This is most likely due to the large number of disease alleles to be found among the cases on both allelic backgrounds of SNP A compared to the number of causal alleles in controls. For the CDCV scenario, we compared SampleSeq to the alternative methods when the disease alleles were not rare, but we assumed that p d = 0.01 in our calculations. In these experiments, SampleSeq was slightly more efficient than the burden of proxy alleles in cases, and was slightly less efficient than the burden of proxy risk alleles regardless of case status (, Supplementary). This was also true when p d was close to the true frequency of d. Also notable was the generally smaller magnitude of differencesamong the other three methods. These results are due to the presence of many disease alleles in both cases and controls, as a result of the subtle effect sizes simulated in this scenario. We further summarized the results of these simulations by comparing the average expected counts of disease alleles as determined by SampleSeq, E(d), to the average count of observed disease alleles, d, for each scenario and sample size . As the calculation of E ik is based on a hypothetical disease variant frequency (p d = 0.01 in our calculations), E(d) may not match the true number of disease alleles. For the CDRV scenarios, where the frequency of d was between 0.0025 and 0.01, the ratio of the average expected to observed alleles across sample sizes were 1.7 for K = 0.01, 2.0 for K = 0.05, 2.9 for K = 0.1, and 2.7 for K = 0.2. When the allele frequency of d was constrained to fall within the range 0.0090.011, and p d was set to 0.01, the ratio of E(d) to d was 1.3 for K = 0.01. However, for the SA scenario, the ratio of average E(d) to d was 0.41, although this value is counting the observation of all disease alleles in a region, where there were 10 disease alleles in the simulation per region. Also for the CDCV scenario, the ratio of average E(d) to d was 0.27, demonstrating that our method is based on finding rare disease alleles, and that if the disease alleles are common, they will occur much more often than expected by SampleSeq assuming a rare p d. Although E ik changes as the hypothetical disease variant frequency changes, using these estimates to rank subjects when an incorrect allele frequency is used in the calculation is still an effective means of selecting subjects. To demonstrate this, we calculated E(d) under p d = 0.1, 0.01 and 0.001, using the simulation parameters from the experiment in, and present their correlation coefficients in. While the magnitude of the value of E(d) is proportional to the assumed value of p d , the ranking of subjects is similar even when p d is misspecified.Five regions, one rare disease variant per region, K = 0.01. Correlations for cases are in the upper triangle and those for controls are in the lower triangle. variant than a case subject who is heterozygous for some of those risk alleles. SampleSeq allows us to quantify their probabilities of carrying real disease variants and then select subjects accordingly. We observe that compared to random controls, samples of random cases have much better performance for discovering rare disease alleles, which is consistent with previous studies . Some investigators may choose to evaluate a set of controls in order to perform screening with association tests before proceeding to large-scale variant-based genotyping. This is likely the most effective strategy when resources are abundant for resequencing studies and sample sizes are large. However, when sample sizes are small, we would expect most of the ability to detect the presence of rare disease alleles in the population to come from the cases. As the majority of samples selected by SampleSeq will be cases, in some situations, it may be reasonable to resequence some controls to augment the SampleSeq selection. The control subjects could then be used to screen variants for frequency differences and prioritize for genotyping. This comparison would be biased due to the frequency enrichment achieved by SampleSeq, but could help discern the SNPs that should be tested for association with the trait with unbiased approaches, such as genotyping in the full cohort. However, reallocating resources to sequence additional controls would also lower the chance of seeing real disease variants in the cases. If the number of subjects that can be resequenced is small, we advocate also using the sequence context and putative biological impact of variants to prioritize SNPs for genotyping, as there will not be a large amount of statistical information for comparing rare variant frequencies in small samples. Some recent research has shown that association testing from sequence data may provide slightly more statistical power than variant-based genotyping on a per-subject basis using two recently developed tests of association . However, we note that due to the large difference in the cost of resequencing to the cost of variant-based genotyping, on a per-unit of resources basis, many more subjects could be genotyped with variant-based methods than could be resequenced. Thereby, the statistical power to detect an association might be considerably better in a large sample of variant-based genotypes than in a small sample of sequence-based genotypes, utilizing the same resources. The goal of this work is to optimize the resources expended for resequencing studies, preserving DNA samples and financial assets for subsequent steps in investigations. The key element of the model that provides SampleSeq with a performance advantage over counting common risk alleles is the assumption of rare ancestral recombination between SNPs A and D. We assumed that disease variant d originated on the risk allele a background, which resulted in three haplotypes, AD, aD and ad. To break up the LD between the SNPs through recombination, the recombination event needs to occur in the double heterogyzotes, for which the frequency is quite low as d is rare. Moreover, if the two SNPs are close enough to have very low recombination fraction between them, then the chance of breaking up the LD between the SNPs will be small. This is supported by our simulation data; the recombinant haplotype frequency averaged 3.710 4 across all our CDRV haplotype pools, suggesting p dA 0 is a reasonable assumption. It is implemented in our software for the ease of computation. In simulations where this assumption was badly violated, such as the CDCV scenario, the performance of SampleSeq was still competitive with the burden of risk alleles in cases. We also noted that as the prevalence in our simulations increased, but the ORs of rare disease variants was held constant, the proportion of cases not carrying any risk alleles at any of the target disease loci increased. This observation is a result of our simulation strategy, but it is perhaps worthy of note that high-prevalence traits may require many more rare risk alleles than low-prevalence traits for the CDRV model to account for most of the trait heritability for a highly heritable common trait. Thereby, if there are not a large number of associated regions identified for a high-prevalence trait, it is possible that the yield of rare disease alleles from a resequencing Page: 2118 21122118 
