EnrichNet: network-based gene set enrichment analysis Motivation: Assessing functional associations between an experimentally derived gene or protein set of interest and a database of known gene/protein sets is a common task in the analysis of large-scale functional genomics data. For this purpose, a frequently used approach is to apply an over-representation-based enrichment analysis. However, this approach has four drawbacks: (i) it can only score functional associations of overlapping gene/proteins sets; (ii) it disregards genes with missing annotations; (iii) it does not take into account the network structure of physical interactions between the gene/protein sets of interest and (iv) tissue-specific gene/protein set associations cannot be recognized. Results: To address these limitations, we introduce an integrative analysis approach and web-application called EnrichNet. It combines a novel graph-based statistic with an interactive sub-network visualization to accomplish two complementary goals: improving the prioritization of putative functional gene/protein set associations by exploiting information from molecular interaction networks and tissue-specific gene expression data and enabling a direct biological interpretation of the results. By using the approach to analyse sets of genes with known involvement in human diseases, new pathway associations are identified, reflecting a dense sub-network of interactions between their corresponding proteins. Availability: EnrichNet is freely available at http://www.enrichnet.org.The analysis of functional genomics data from high-throughput experiments often involves the assessment of potential functional associations between a gene or protein set of interest, e.g. differentially expressed genes in a microarray study and known gene/protein sets representing cellular processes and pathways. To identify and prioritize these putative associations, a wide range of enrichment analysis tools have been developed in recent years, To whom correspondence should be addressed.The authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the first two authors should be regarded as joint First Authors. including three basic types of methods (seefor a more comprehensive review): 1. Over-representation analysis (ORA) techniques, assessing the statistical overrepresentation of a user-defined, pre-selected gene/protein list of interest in a reference list of known gene/protein sets using a statistical test, e.g. the one-sided Fishers exact test or the hypergeometric distribution.2. Gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) methods, which in contrast to classical annotation enrichment analyses incorporate expression level measurements from an unfiltered dataset, including non-parametric approaches such as GSEA , Catmap , ErmineJ and GeneTrail and parametric approaches such as PAGE , MEGO , FatiScan and GAGE .3. Integrative and modular enrichment analysis (MEA) approaches , which account for dependencies between genes and proteins inferred from biological networks and ontology graphs (e.g. Ontologizer and GeneCodis ) or by combining multiple types of annotations (e.g. DAVID . Most of these approaches provide a ranking list of known gene/protein sets as output, scoring the evidence for their association with a user-defined target gene/protein list of interest. Although these prioritized, putative functional associations are a useful starting point for further experimental validation and analysis, they also have the following major limitations (among others): @BULLET ORA techniques tend to have low discriminative power (for a target gene set, several reference gene sets receive the same or similar significance scores, e.g. see) and the scores vary considerably with small changes in the overlap size.@BULLET Functional information captured in the graph structure of a molecular interaction network connecting the gene/protein sets of interest is disregarded. @BULLET Genes and proteins in the network neighbourhood, in particular those with missing annotations, are not taken into account.@BULLET The recognition of tissue-specific gene/protein set associations is often statistically infeasible. 
