Genetics and population analysis ESPRESSO: taking into account assessment errors on outcome and exposures in power analysis for association studies Motivation: Very large studies are required to provide sufficiently big sample sizes for adequately powered association analyses. This can be an expensive undertaking and it is important that an accurate sample size is identified. For more realistic sample size calculation and power analysis, the impact of unmeasured aetiological determinants and the quality of measurement of both outcome and explanatory variables should be taken into account. Conventional methods to analyse power use closed-form solutions that are not flexible enough to cater for all of these elements easily. They often result in a potentially substantial overestimation of the actual power. Results: In this article, we describe the Estimating Sample-size and Power in R by Exploring Simulated Study Outcomes tool that allows assessment errors in power calculation under various biomedical scenarios to be incorporated. We also report a real world analysis where we used this tool to answer an important strategic question for an existing cohort. Availability and implementation: The software is available for online calculation and downloads atA critical question to answer when designing or extending large scale studies and biobanks is what sample size is required to achieve adequate statistical power (i.e. the ability to detect the true determinants of the outcome). For a large study aimed at exploring weak effects, the answer can have major implications for funding and resources because the number of participants to be recruited (sample size) depends critically on the desired level of power; the higher the desired power, the larger the required sample size. Among other things, the answer also depends on the quality of the measurements of the variables of interest since assessment errors, in both outcome and explanatory variables, can substantially reduce the power of association studies . Failure to take account of such assessment errors in power analyses at the design stage of a study may lead to a serious over-estimation of its true statistical power and result in a research platform that is critically underpowered when it comes to analysis. Most conventional approaches to estimating the sample size required to achieve adequate statistical power fail to account rigorously for the sensitivity and specificity of the assessment of categorical outcome and explanatory variables or the reliability of quantitative variables . Furthermore, proper incorporation of the impact of assessment error in multiple variables, and of the analytic disturbance that may arise from variables that have not been measured at all, generally demands non-trivial extension of the methods being used and so is not attempted. But given theIt is important to understand how the MDES should be interpreted. To illustrate the interpretation, considerwhich provides an abstract of the power profile of CPT to investigate SBP as a quantitative outcome measured conventionally in a clinic setting (the results for all the scenarios onare reported under Section 3 of the Supplementary Material). Conventional (peripheral) blood pressure is measured as the mean of three measurements. The device chosen (Colin Prodigy II Vital Signs Monitor OM-2200) is an automated device that uses the oscillometric method for assessing blood pressure.The population distribution of the variable reported in(SBP) is: mean 126 mm/Hg and SD 18.2. In the body of the table, the MDES for the environmental main effect for the moderately common exposure was reported as 0.8123 mm/Hg. This scenario invokes a binary environmental exposure with a prevalence of 0.2 (20). The reported results therefore imply that if the final sample size of CPT was 110 000 participants, if conventional clinic blood pressure was measured using the standard operating protocol (SOP) outlined in the first paragraph above, and if scientific interest focused on the impact of a binary environmental exposure which had realistic characteristics corresponding to those outlined in Section 3.4.2, the power calculations would indicate that there was an 80 chance of detecting, at P-value 0.01, a real effect of that environmental determinant corresponding to an increase (or decrease) in SBP of 0.8123 mm/Hg, on average. Similarly, if interest were focused on a moderately common SNP in a genome wide association study (GWAS) there would be an 80 chance of detecting the effect of a SNP with a minor allele frequency of 0.10 (10) at P-value 10 7 (for genome-wide inference) if that SNP really increased or decreased SBP by at least 1.0433 mm/Hg. 
