Estimating abundances of retroviral insertion sites from DNA fragment length data Motivation: The relative abundance of retroviral insertions in a host genome is important in understanding the persistence and pathogenesis of both natural retroviral infections and retroviral gene therapy vectors. It could be estimated from a sample of cells if only the host genomic sites of retroviral insertions could be directly counted. When host genomic DNA is randomly broken via sonication and then amplified, amplicons of varying lengths are produced. The number of unique lengths of amplicons of an insertion site tends to increase according to its abundance, providing a basis for estimating relative abundance. However, as abundance increases amplicons of the same length arise by chance leading to a non-linear relation between the number of unique lengths and relative abundance. The difficulty in calibrating this relation is compounded by sample-specific variations in the relative frequencies of clones of each length. Results: A likelihood function is proposed for the discrete lengths observed in each of a collection of insertion sites and is maximized with a hybrid expectationmaximization algorithm. Patient data illustrate the method and simulations show that relative abundance can be estimated with little bias, but that variation in highly abundant sites can be large. In replicated patient samples, variation exceeds what the model impliesrequiring adjustment as in Efron (2004) or using jackknife standard errors. Consequently, it is advantageous to collect replicate samples to strengthen inferences about relative abundance. Availability: An R package implements the algorithm described here. It is available at http://soniclength.r-forge.r-project.org/The new deep sequencing methods allow longitudinal tracking of DNA sequence variation in cell populations. These methods have been applied extensively to studies of activation of host cell genes by integration of retroviral DNA. In human gene therapy, vectors derived from retroviruses have been used to treat a sizeable and growing number of diseases, but there have been several cases of insertional activation of cancer genes, leading to intense interest in the relationship of vector integration sites in the human genome to the size of cell populations harboring that clone . In infections by human T-cell leukemia viruses, the relationship between integration site position and cell clone size is likely to be important for leukemia, but the full importance remains to be clarified . Distributions of large numbers of integration sites can be determined using the new deep sequencing methods, but use of this information to estimate abundance is complicated by several types of recovery biases . In a typical experiment, blood cells are obtained from an HTLV1-infected subject or gene therapy patient, genomic DNA is purified from the heterogeneous populations of cells and then DNA is cleaved, ideally by a relatively random method such as DNA shearing. Short DNA linkers are ligated onto the DNA ends, then hostvirus junctions are amplified by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) using one primer that binds the linker and another that binds the viral DNA end. PCR products are then sequenced in bulk, and the resulting reads are aligned to the human genome. Here we present computational tools for relating this type of data to the relative abundance of each cell clone, as marked by integration sites, in the starting cell population. Suppose that the number of cells in a patient that could harbor a viral insertion is C and the number of sites or locations in the genome of each cell (determined by chromosome, position and strand) is L. Then there are C L places in which such an insertion might be found. Use M il to indicate whether there is an insertion in site i in cell l. Let M il = 1 for an insertion and M il = 0 for no insertion there. The abundance of an insertion at one of the L sites is the number of cells hosting an integrated retroviral DNA at that site. That is,is the fraction of the places harboring an insertion whose site is i. The collection of relative abundances is used to characterize a retroviral infection and monitor it for changes. As examples, the number of different insertion sites, the appearance of a highly abundant site, an increase in the number of different sites and measures of the diversity of sites such as the Shannon Information or Gini coefficient all indicate features of the disease or its response to treatment. Previous work has tracked such measures to understand disease progression after infection with human T-cell leukemia virus type 1 (HTLV-1) , latency in human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infections and cell dynamics after human gene correction with integrating vectors . Cleaving the DNA from a sample of cells using restriction enzymes or mu transposons and sequencing the fragments (Hacein-Bey) potentially allows characterization of the relative abundance of cell clones marked by distinct integration sites , but variation in the genomic distribution of restriction sites or sites favored by mu transposons introduces biases that can be hard to correct. Breaking DNA by sonication is nearly random , so that if those fragments could be directly counted, estimates of abundance could be obtained. However, it is necessary to amplify the fragments by PCR before they can be sequenced, and variation in the number of fragments that each parent fragment generates vastly inflates the variance of estimates or abundance (Section 12 in Supplementary Material) based on the read countthe number of fragments whose sequence is mapped to a single site. In data such asreport, where most insertion sites only contribute one or two parent fragments to the sequencer, simple read counts are useless. However, when multiple cells contain an insertion at the same site, random shearing by sonication usually produces fragments of different lengths. The number of different lengths associated with each integration site tends to increase with its abundance, but the increase is non-linear due to coincidental shearing at the same site in multiple genomes.empirically fitted a calibration curve for this non-linear function using three dilutions of genomic DNA from an HTLV-1 infected individual, and used it to estimate the number of parent fragments of each site in their samples. Below, estimation of the relative abundance of a retroviral insertion site in an infected patient using the collection of fragment lengths for each integration site is considered. We introduce some notation for referring to data on retroviral insertions and mention some measures that may be of interest in studying populations of sites. Then we describe a maximum likelihood estimator based on the distinct lengths of clones recovered. A brief review of procedures for collecting fragment length data for retroviral insertions is given in Section 2, seefor more details. We devise a statistical approach for estimating the abundances of retroviral insertion sites and an algorithm to implement it. The algorithm is applied to real and simulated data and the accuracy of the approach is assessed and compared with the method of. Supplementary Material provides extensive notes and more details, including studies of estimators of number of unseen species proposed by Chao (1987) and by, of the Shannon Information and the Chao-Shen coverage adjusted entropy and the Gini Coefficient.Data from 11 HTLV-1-infected patients were studied. Three samples taken from each patient were used, and the consecutive samples were taken at intervals ranging from 466 days to 1998 days with a mean of 1353 days. The patients are labeled A, B, , K in the figures and the individual samples in each patient are numbered 1, 2, 3 in chronological order. On each of those days, three replicate subsamples were taken from the DNA pool of each sample. The algorithm of Section 2.3 gave estimates of and . The glm fit used cubic B-splines for the fragment lengths with interior knots at 50 and 100. The boundary knots are placed at 1 and at 10 plus the largest observed length and counts of zero were used for unobserved lengths in that range. Most results below are based on simultaneously fitting all three replicates of a single sample. However, in some instances fits are based on the separate replicates. Three iterations of the algorithm were required, and then the fit was deemed to have converged when the absolute value of gradients of the log-likelihood with respect to i were all 10 5 when divided byby by i and 0.01 in any case. Most samples had converged in the minimum three iterations, but one sample required 10 iterations to converge. Setting more stringent convergence criteria had negligible effect on the results.shows the graphs ofof of for triplicate subsamples of a single sample from each of the two different patients (samples B2 and I1). As can be seen there is a substantial difference between the two patients and the curves for Patient I vary markedly among the triplicates. As a consequence, it seems unwise to try to find a common estimat to be applied across all the samples or even the subsamples.The insert inshows the expected number of unique lengths, J j=1 (1exp( j )), corresponding to eacheach each curve as a function of the number of parent fragments, . Estimates based on these curves approximate the maximum likelihood estimates. They can be compared with the empirical calibration curve of, which is seen to be quite different from these. Indeed, they are so different from one another that no one of them could adequately substitute for the others. It is of some interest to see how the curves forfor for vary by patient, by sample and by replicate. Supplementaryshows the histogram ofof of 60 / 100 , the ratio of heights of the curve at length 60 and 100. Note that this portion of the curve reflects the typically geometric decline in the probability of shearing. The values vary by 3-fold. The analysis of variance (ANOVA) for log( 100 / 60 ) with factors for patient and sample date (nested within patient) shows significant effects for patient (P 0.0001) and for date (P 0.0001). The variance components are estimated as 0.004 for patient, 0.028 for date and 0.019 for replicate. The variance component for patient is smallest and an order of magnitude smaller than the sum of the other two. So, most of the variation would seem to be tied to the sample preparation and processing. The diagnostic plots of Section 2.6 shown in Section 11 of the Supplementary Material revealed a few sites whose curve for had sections where was much smaller than the estimate (or perhaps even zero). One such site at chr8:134994577F (by hg18) had no lengths between 88 and 102 but many outside that region. A repeat of ATGA covers 134 994 637 to 134 994 665 (or lengths 6092), which complicates mapping the shear site. The shortfall in might be addressed by inspection of the original sequence reads for this site or by imputing the number apparently missed. Such corrective measures would be warranted if high abundance sites were affected.Each abundance parameter is assigned to an interval category. In each category, the average of the parameters is found , of the estimates based on three replicates , of the estimates based on single replicates and of the average based on empirical calibration .We addressed the problem of estimating the abundance of insertion sites from data on fragment lengths by a maximum likelihood approach. Simulations showed that the method works well, when the estimated probabilities of fragment lengths are not too variable. When a glm is used to fit the fragment length distribution, the abundance estimates have little bias and the asymptotic standard errors accurately portray the variability in simulated data. These standard errors are available for single replicates, and provide a check on the model: empirical variations in triplicates from patient data varied more than expected, showing overdispersion of abundance estimates. Further, the z-statistics for the change in relative abundance have a broader distribution than the theory suggests. These observations emphasize the value of replication and mandate the use of standard errors derived empirically from replicates (as with a jackknife standard error) or by application of the large-scale hypothesis testing approach . Inspection of the data as histograms and as normal probability plots suggests that the large-scale hypothesis testing framework is suitable for testing changes in relative abundance. The standard errors associated with relative abundances increase dramatically as the relative abundances increase 10 using the current setup. This makes it rather difficult to detect changes in the relative abundance of insertion sites that are highly abundant. For example, a change from 40 to 50 is below the limit of detection in data like those shown here in which there are three replicates. The standard errors of abundant sites would diminish if a sample were divided into more replicates. Jackknife corrections for bias in the total number of insertion sites, the entropy of abundances and their Gini coefficient due to unseen insertion sites were successful in simulations (Sections 4, 7 and 8 in Supplementary Material) in spite of a large fraction of unseen sites. These corrections were enabled by the replicates, which also allowed the computation of jackknife standard errors. Some heterogeneity of fragment lengths across sites was observed, the increase in power of added replicates to detect this also emphasizes the importance of replication. Even more replicates than the three used here may be needed for careful monitoring of patient status; the power to detect change in the abundance of highly abundant insertion sites is limited even with three replicates of each sample. In clinical monitoring in which highly abundant sites play a key role, an obvious way to increase power is to increase the number of replicates beyond the three replicates used here. Going forward, these methods allow much more detailed assessment of clonal behavior during HTLV-1 infection. In the first analysis of these data, abundances could only be estimated roughly and standard errors had to be empirically determined. Using the methods described here, combined with ongoing data acquisition, it will be possible to relate much more fine grained information on clonal abundance to clinically relevant parameters such as viral gene expression and leukemogenesis. 
