Estimating evolutionary rates using time-structured data: a general comparison of phylogenetic methods Motivation: In rapidly evolving pathogens, including viruses and some bacteria, genetic change can accumulate over short time-frames. Accordingly, their sampling times can be used to calibrate molecular clocks, allowing estimation of evolutionary rates. Methods for estimating rates from time-structured data vary in how they treat phylogenetic uncertainty and rate variation among lin-eages. We compiled 81 virus data sets and estimated nucleotide substitution rates using root-to-tip regression, least-squares dating and Bayesian inference. Results: Although estimates from these three methods were often congruent, this largely relied on the choice of clock model. In particular, relaxed-clock models tended to produce higher rate estimates than methods that assume constant rates. Discrepancies in rate estimates were also associated with high among-lineage rate variation, and phylogenetic and temporal clustering. These results provide insights into the factors that affect the reliability of rate estimates from time-structured sequence data, emphasizing the importance of clock-model testing.Reliable inference of molecular evolutionary time-scales depends on accurate estimates of substitution rates. The simplest way to estimate these rates is to assume that the divergence of nucleotide or amino acid sequences occurs constantly over time , a model known as the strict molecular clock. Under this model, the rate of evolution corresponds to the amount of sequence divergence between a pair of lineages, divided by the time to their most recent common ancestor. For data sets in which appreciable genetic change has accumulated during the window of sampling, such that the sequence data are time structured, the sequence ages can be used as calibrations to estimate the rate (reviewed by). Sequence data from rapidly evolving pathogens and ancient specimens often meet these conditions . There has been a surge in phylogenetic methods that can explicitly handle time-structured sequence data. These methods include root-to-tip regression (implemented in), least-squares dating (implemented in LSD;), and Bayesian phylogenetic inference (e.g. BEAST;). These methods differ in how they treat phylogenetic uncertainty and in their assumptions about rate variation among lineages. Root-to-tip regression uses a phylogenetic tree with branch lengths in units of genetic divergence (e.g. substitutions/site). A regression of the root-to-tip number of expected substitutions as a function of the sampling times is fitted . The slope of the regression corresponds to the rate, the x-intercept is the time to the most recent common ancestor, and the R 2 value can be used as a measure of clocklike behavior. Crucially, however, the data points in the regression are not phylogenetically independent . In particular, deep branches in the tree contribute to multiple root-to-tip distances, leading to pseudoreplication. Least-squares dating also requires a phylogenetic tree. Instead of fitting a regression, it estimates the rate using a normal approximation of the Langley-Fitch algorithm . Both root-to-tip regression and least-squares dating assume clock-like evolution and use rooted trees, but they are able to estimate the position of the root as part of the analysis. However, the two methods do require a fixed tree, such that phylogenetic uncertainty is not explicitly taken into account, although this can be done indirectly by conducting the analysis over a set of bootstrap trees. Bayesian approaches to estimating evolutionary rates require a model of rate variation to be specified. In most Bayesian dating programs, such as BEAST, several clock models are available. The strict clock (SC) model assumes rate homogeneity throughout the tree. In contrast, relaxed-clock models allow a different rate along each branch in the tree, although these are assumed to follow a chosen statistical distribution. For example, branch rates can be treated as independent and identically distributed samples from a lognormal distribution or an exponential distribution in the uncorrelated lognormal (UCLD) and uncorrelated exponential (UCED) relaxedclock models, respectively . An advantage of Bayesian methods is that the rate estimate is integrated over the uncertainty of all of the other parameters, including the phylogenetic tree. The fundamental differences among the three methods might be expected to result in different estimates of evolutionary rates . To test for congruence in rate estimates we collected sequence data sets for 81 different RNA and DNA viruses. For each data set we estimated the evolutionary rate using root-to-tip regression in TempEst v1.5 , least-squares dating in LSD v0.2 , and Bayesian phylogenetic inference in BEAST v1.8 . We found some discrepancies in the estimates, most of which were explained by high-among lineage rate variation, and phylogenetic and temporal clustering. As such, these factors should be routinely assessed in empirical data to improve estimates of evolutionary rates and time scales.For 28 of the 81 data sets it was not possible to estimate the rate using TempEst or LSD. This occurs when the rate estimate from TempEst is negative, or when that from LSD corresponds to the lower threshold value. We found that 21 of these data sets displayed considerable rate variation across branches, with coefficients of rate variation that were distinctly non-zero (Supplementary). We therefore focus on the 53 data sets for which we could estimate the rate using all three methods (Supplementary). We also calculated the regression P-value and found that 16 data sets yielded positive slopes that were non-significant. However, since the P-value is difficult to interpret in this context due to pseudoreplication, we retained these data sets in our analysis. We plotted a pairwise comparison of the rates from the different methods. We measured their median proportional difference between the estimates with sufficient temporal structure according to CR2 in the date-randomization test. For example, for TempEst vs. LSD the proportional difference is the estimate from TempEst minus that from LSD, divided by that from TempEst. For the estimates obtained with BEAST we report the mean, while for those from TempEst and LSD we use the point estimates. To measure bias we noted the percentage of data sets for which the estimates along the y-axis are larger than those on the x-axis. Although TempEst tended to produce higher estimates than LSD, with a bias of more than 80, the estimates from TempEst were only about 0.14 times higher those for LSD measured using the median proportional difference (and). In comparison, the estimates from BEAST were less congruent with those from both LSD and TempEst, with median proportional differences of 0.40 and 0.25, respectively. Although the estimates from BEAST were not systematically higher or lower than those from LSD and TempEst, the level of bias was greater for data sets with considerable among-lineage rate variation. For example, in our comparison of BEAST versus LSD , 83.3 of data sets analyzed using the UCLD model had higher rates than those from LSD, but only 27.3 of those analyzed with the SC model displayed this pattern . This is likely because LSD and TempEst assume a strict molecular clock, whereas BEAST can use relaxed-clock models. This result is also evident in our comparison of the different clock models in BEAST. The 95 credible intervals of estimates from the three clock models largely overlap and there is broad agreement between the estimates using the UCLD and UCED models. However, the mean values from the two relaxed-clock models are nearly always higher than those from the SC model (;). A probable reason for this pattern is that estimates from relaxed-clock models have higher uncertainty than those from the SC model, which might be upwardly biasedThe proportional difference for two methods, such as TempEst versus LSD, is the difference between their estimates divided by the estimate from TempEst. The measure of bias is the percentage of estimates on the y-axis that are larger than those on the x-axis .Estimating evolutionary rates using time-structured databecause the rate naturally has a lower bound at zero. These factors can lead to a higher mean value . Consequently, the use of relaxed molecular clocks can lead to overestimates of the mean substitution rate when the data in fact fit a SC, indicating that clock-model testing should be routinely performed. We looked for common features among those data sets for which the methods analyzed here produced very different rate estimates. Notably, these data sets typically displayed high among-lineage rate variation, incongruence between the maximum-likelihood and Bayesian estimates of tree topology, and phylogenetic and temporal clustering. However, high among-lineage rate variation was the only factor to display a significant (i.e. P 0.05) and positive correlation with the degree of incongruence across all data sets (Supplementary; Supplementary). One example of a data set with incongruent rate estimates among methods and which displayed all these factors is the Hantaan virus data set, with an especially high coefficient of rate variation (mean 1.29, 95 credible interval 0.712.00), very strong phylogenetic and temporal clustering (P 0.05), and high relative topological distance between the maximum-likelihood and Bayesian trees (1.08). Strikingly, the absolute sampling time-frame does not appear to predict whether there would be conflict between the rate estimates from different methods. Overall, our study demonstrates that methods for analyzing timestructured sequence data largely produce congruent estimates of substitution rates, provided that clock-model testing is performed and that the data meet certain criteria. In practice, therefore, it is important to verify that the data have sufficient temporal structure and have no phylogenetic or temporal clustering. If the data display phylogenetic and temporal clustering, a modification of the date randomization test can be conducted , but this is not trivial for data sets without discrete monophyletic groups with the same sampling times, as in our data. The performance of these methods should also be investigated using analyses of other time-structured data sets, such as those from bacteria and ancient DNA. These data sets form the basis of a wide range of important evolutionary studies, but pose substantially different analytical challenges from the virus data sets studied here.Measures of distance and bias are the same as those in. 
