Structural bioinformatics Exploration of conformational transition pathways from coarse-grained simulations Motivation: A new algorithm to trace conformational transitions in proteins is presented. The method uses discrete molecular dynamics as engine to sample protein conformational space. A multiple minima Go-like potential energy function is used in combination with several enhancing sampling strategies, such as metadynamics, Maxwell Demon molecular dynamics and essential dynamics. The method, which shows an unprecedented computational efficiency, is able to trace a wide range of known experimental transitions. Contrary to simpler methods our strategy does not introduce distortions in the chemical structure of the protein and is able to reproduce well complex non-linear conformational transitions. The method, called GOdMD, can easily introduce additional restraints to the transition (presence of ligand, known intermediate, known maintained contacts,. . .) and is freely distributed to the community through the Spanish National Bioinformatics Institute (http://mmb.irbbarcelona.org/GOdMD). Availability: Freely available on the web at http://mmb.irbbarcelona. org/GOdMD.Many biological functions of proteins such as mechanic work, signal transduction or enzymatic activity are modulated by a key property of them: flexibility . Flexibility is a property that has been refined and maintained by evolution and that, in turn has been also exploited by evolution to generate new proteins in a conservative mechanism, which guarantees the maintenance of the structural scaffold as well as the relevant deformation pattern . Structural databases show increasing number of proteins having alternative structures depending on external factors (such as crystallization conditions, posttransductional chemical modifications, presence of ligands, changes in solvent environment, etc). This probes the existence of dramatic conformational transitions in proteins, but giving no information on how such transitions happen. Recent refinements of experimental techniques have provided direct evidence on the mechanisms of conformational transitions for some model proteins . However, we are still far from the point that all conformational transitions could be described by means of experimental methods. This situation forces the use of simulation techniques, which has been largely refined in the past years , providing information of increasing quality for a large number of conformational transitions in proteins . Molecular dynamics (MD), using atomistic force-fields and explicit representation of solvent , is probably the most accurate theoretical technique for reproducing protein flexibility. Recent computational approaches have made possible the simulation of thousands of proteins and the derivation of up to millisecond trajectories for proteins . Unfortunately, most conformational transitions are still far from the capabilities of plain atomistic MD, forcing the use of biasing schemes , designed to maximize the sampling along a given variable that is believed to capture conformational transition motions. Biased-MD protocols are extremely powerful, but they are expensive computationally, require expertise from the user and can lead to incorrect results when the transition coordinate is not well defined. Coarse-grained (CG) models are inexpensive, but still accurate alternatives to atomistic MD simulations, which have gained significant popularity in recent years. Unfortunately, the use of CG models require the assumption of a certain loss of detail in the simulation, for example, explicit solvent is ignored, which prevent the study of specific waterprotein interactions and side chains are either ignored or dramatically simplified , which raises problems To whom correspondence should be addressed. to reproduce ligand-target interactions. CG models have been calibrated against experimental data, such as B-factors, structural variability in databases or atomistic MD, and despite their simplicity, provide often results of surprising quality with limited computer resources and reduced expertise from the user. CG-methods have been largely used to trace conformational transitions in proteins. The first implementations followed mainly interpolation schemes between original and final conformations . Interpolation protocols are fast and guarantee the completion of the transition, but often at the expense of unrealistic intermediate conformations, which are not good starting points for refinement through more accurate atomistic simulations. Alternative CG-transition methods have been developed under the assumption that biologically relevant transitions should follow the easiest deformation movements of the proteins defined as the softest deformation modes obtained by diagonalization of the Hessian matrix derived from an elastic network model (ENM) Hamiltonian:where i and j are residues, ij is a delta function equal to 1 when i and j are at less than a given distance, and 0 otherwise; K is a spring constant (linear or distance dependent), R ij stands for inter-residue distance and the superscript 0 refers to the value of K ij in the reference structure. Morphing methods based on the use of essential deformation modes provide more reasonable approaches than linear interpolation schemes, but are far from being optimal since (i) the covalent structure of the protein can be damaged when large displacements along a limited number of Cartesian eigenvectors are made, (ii) a non-negligible number of transitions do not align with the intrinsic deformation pattern of proteins , and even those cases where the alignment between the essential deformation space and the transition vector is good, displacement along the essential space of one of the proteins never allows a full transition between the two conformational states. Recent advances in the field, such as the use of multiple reference structures to define a transition-dependent essential deformation space or the derivation of the essential deformation modes in the dihedral space , have alleviated but not solved these problems. In this article, we present a new approach to obtain ultra-fast, but accurate, conformational transition pathways in proteins out of physics-based molecular mechanics simulations. By combining an efficient sampling technique [discrete molecular dynamics (dMD;with a novel multiple-well Go-like scheme. Sampling is enhanced with biasing techniques such as metadynamics and Maxwell Demon MD . The method was tested in a large battery of transitions (near 50 pairs of structures) obtaining, with reduced computational cost, reasonable pathways in all cases, including in cases of extreme difficulty, where transition requires, for example, partial unfolding of the protein. Owing to the physical nature of the method, sampled intermediate structures maintain covalent structure, and no steric clashes are allowed. In cases where experimental intermediates are characterized, the method finds transition paths passing close to them. Surprisingly, the method outperforms our previous more detailed algorithm, Maxwell Demon discrete molecular dynamics procedure (MDdMD;), and is also competitive with respect to alternative methods in the literature (Supplementary Figs S1S3). Our novel approach is flexible, allowing the introduction of any perturbation. Furthermore, the user can easily bias trajectories to guarantee that known experimental intermediates are sampled.To evaluate the power of GOdMD, we apply it to trace transitions between known equilibrium conformations of proteins. After analyzing protein data bank (PDB), we define a set of 94 transitions corresponding to 47 proteins showing two distinct conformations. This large benchmark set was extracted from a previous work in our group and spans a wide range of proteins from 100 to 1000 residues, showing different shapes and secondary structure composition. The database contains no trivial conformational changes and some of the conformational transitions represent dramatic geometrical alterations in the structure of the protein, including refolding in some cases. Many of the transitions are coupled to the binding to small ligands (60) and/or macromolecules (39), which increase the difficulties to trace reasonable conformational transition pathways. Further analysis of the data set reveals that a significant fraction of the transitions (44) correspond to open/ close ones, which can a priori generate hysteresis problems. Finally, 22 of the transitions do not align well [overlap (accumulated dot product) between top five normal modes and conformational transition is below 0.25] with the first five essential deformation modes detected from EN-normal mode analysis (NMA), i.e. that they will be very difficult to represent by simply activating movements along intrinsic deformation modes. Looking at different criteria we consider 62 of the 94 transitions as difficult or very difficult to follow, which means that we are validating our method with the most exigent transition dataset available. GOdMD has been able to find reasonable pathways for all studied transitions, even those requiring large refolding processes. The algorithm can provide multiple transition trajectories, defining a scenario of multiple pathways, which fits better into the transition funnel theory . Furthermore, no violations of covalent distances, nor steric clashes or chemical meaningless conformations are sampled during transitions, which are always smooth, without the presence of apparent discontinuities or hysteresis effects (Supplementary). PROSA calculations performed in random conformations sampled during the different transition yields to native-like profiles (Supplementary Figs S9 and S10), indicating that we are not sampling unrealistic conformations along the transition. The method is extremely efficient, 460 of trajectories are finished in 52 min wall-clock time in a laptop computer (2.4 GHz Intel Core 2 Duo) and even the most difficult transitions are finished in 530 min in the same computer. We are working in a parallel algorithm to explore larger systems with similar efficiency.We present GOdMD, a new method to trace conformational transition at the CG level. The method uses the fast CG dMD algorithm coupled to two biasing methods: (i) metadynamics adapted to follow proteins easiest deformation pattern, and (ii) a Metropolis-based Maxwell Demon algorithm. The method is fast and, contrary to many other approaches, always finds a smooth transition path when tested in a large dataset of transitions. Obtained trajectories maintain the covalent structure of the protein avoiding also unfavourable contacts, sampling intermediate structures with protein-like properties, a clear advantage with respect to usual morphing schemes. The method is extremely flexible and can be easily adapted to introduce the effect of external perturbations in the transition or to bias the transition using experimental information. Limitations of the method are likely to be coupled to its CG nature that precludes the derivation of atomistic information on the transition. The approach is then expected to be especially powerful to obtain rough transition pathways that will be further refined by atomistic MD-based algorithms. A computer program implementing our method is publicly available as a web server at mmb.irbbarcelona.org/GOdMD. 
