Systems biology Exploring metabolic pathways in genome-scale networks via generating flux modes Motivation: The reconstruction of metabolic networks at the genome scale has allowed the analysis of metabolic pathways at an unprecedented level of complexity. Elementary flux modes (EFMs) are an appropriate concept for such analysis. However, their number grows in a combinatorial fashion as the size of the metabolic network increases, which renders the application of EFMs approach to large metabolic networks difficult. Novel methods are expected to deal with such complexity. Results: In this article, we present a novel optimization-based method for determining a minimal generating set of EFMs, i.e. a convex basis. We show that a subset of elements of this convex basis can be effectively computed even in large metabolic networks. Our method was applied to examine the structure of pathways producing lysine in Escherichia coli. We obtained a more varied and informative set of pathways in comparison with existing methods. In addition, an alternative pathway to produce lysine was identified using a detour via propionyl-CoA, which shows the predictive power of our novel approach. Availability: The source code in C++ is available upon request.During the last decade, different approaches have been proposed to explore the structure of complex metabolic networks from a pathway-oriented perspective . As in other methods , these approaches are mainly built upon the steady state condition and irreversibility (thermodynamic) constraints, which define a polyhedral cone, typically referred to as the flux cone. In particular, pathway-based methods search for solutions in the flux cone that satisfy a simplicity condition, technically the non-decomposability condition. These properties were condensed in the definition of elementary flux mode (EFM) in the work of Schuster and Hilgetag (1994). Since its introduction, the concept of EFM has received much attention, showing that a wide range of questions in bioengineering and bioinformatics can be addressed using such an approach . In particular, the prediction of novel biologically meaningful pathways constitutes one of the most important applications of EFM analysis. An example is the in silico prediction via EFM analysis of the PEP-glyoxylate cycle , which was later confirmed experimentally . However, due to combinatorial explosion , the computation of EFMs is not easy and, until recently, their analysis has been restricted to small metabolic networks. In this context,, have presented an improved method that expands the applicability of the EFMs approach to moderate-size metabolic networks; however, large metabolic networks remain beyond the capabilities of current algorithms. We have recently shown that the K-shortest EFMs (for small K values) can be calculated in large networks, even at the genome scale, using integer linear programming . The use of optimization introduces more flexibility into EFM computation and, therefore, the direct exploration of a particular subset of EFMs of interest can be accomplished without having first to compute the full set of EFMs. This represents a clear advantage with respect to previous methods . A concept related to EFMs is that of convex basis. First introduced in, it was defined as a minimal set of EFMs that generate the solution space. This means that any vector in the flux cone, in particular any other EFM not included in this minimal set, can be written as a non-negative linear combination of the elements of the basis. For this reason, a convex basis is typically referred to as a minimal generating set and elements of this basis as generating flux modes, GFMs . However, the convexIn this section, we present results corresponding to the application of our K-shortest GFMs to analyze the pathway structure of E.coli to produce lysine. We used the genome-scale metabolic network of E.coli K-12 MG1665 , which involves 2082 reactions and 1668 metabolites. As noted above, our method is particularly useful for networks of this size, since the computation of a convex basis via traditional methods (;) is not applicable in these networks. A minimal medium based on glucose, ammonium and oxygen was utilized. We neglected constraints from proton and cofactor (ATP, NADH, NADPH, etc.) balances, fixing them as external metabolites. One may question the validity of this hypothesis for NADP and NADPH, since NADPH is required in stoichiometric amounts for lysine production and, as discussed in, its supply has substantial impact in metabolism. In this work, for the sake of simplicity, we focused on pathways for the supply of the carbon backbone of lysine. Moreover, extending the current work to consider the role of cofactors in lysine production can be accomplished without loss of generality, as shown in. See Supplementary Material for the exact definition of the medium and cofactors set. The reaction transporting lysine from the periplasm compartment to the external compartment is pseudo-irreversible, i.e. no reversible GFMs exist that produce lysine. Thus, we need only to focus on irreversible GFMs producing lysine. Our K-shortest GFMs method was then applied with K=100 and constraint (11) for lysine. We also computed the K-shortest EFMs, as described in, in order to compare the results. We selected M=100 to guarantee that no pathway information is missed, similarly to. In a 64 Bits, 2.00 GHz, 12 GB RAM PC, CPLEX 12.1 took approximately 30 and 100 min to compute the 100 shortest EFMs and GFMs, respectively. Therefore, though computation time is acceptable, our method is less efficient than the K-shortest EFMs method. Note that, by setting cofactors as external metabolites, we may find solutions that use some cofactors as carbon source, which are irrelevant for the biosynthesis of lysine using glucose as carbon source. As it can be observed in the Supplementary Material, we found this issue in longer pathways using AMP as carbon source. To prevent these solutions from appearing, we constrained the adenine pool formed by ATP, ADP and AMP to be in balance by adding the following constraint to our previous formulation:s AMPr are the stoichiometric coefficients of ATP, ADP and AMP, respectively, for reaction r.. First, the 100 shortest EFMs and 100 shortest GFMs involve 54 and 132 reactions, respectively. In addition, while the maximum length for 100 shortest EFMs is 26, this is 37 for the 100 shortest GFMs, which just indicates that the K-shortest GFMs method produce a set of longer pathways. We also used the Hamming distance to evaluate the differences between each pair of solutions of the 100 shortest EFMs (GFMs), finding that the average Hamming distance is higher for GFMs, which just indicates that the shortest EFMs approach determine a less diverse set of solutions. Furthermore, it can be observed fromthat from 54 reactions that participate in the 100 shortest EFMs, 49 are included in the 100 shortest GFMs. This implies that most information in the shortest EFMs is included in the shortest GFMs and, therefore, the GFMs approach is more informative. To validate this, we created a subnetwork with the reactions forming the 100 shortest EFMs and computed the full set of EFMs for this subnetwork via efmtool . As observed incytosol, nitrogen metabolism, the balancing of succinate (succ) and succinyl-CoA (succoa) and the production of dha. With respect to the 100 shortest GFMs, we have longer routes than the 100 shortest EFMs, though they are still short (maximum 37 reactions). The set of pathways is now much more varied (see Supplementary Figs S4 and S5). For instance, the pentose phosphate (PP) pathway and the glyoxylate shunt are now recovered. Moreover, we obtain several routes around the switch node per-pyr-oaa, which is known to be responsible for the distribution of the carbon flux among catabolism, anabolism and energy supply in several bacteria . Overall, most of previous biochemical knowledge on the production of lysine is recovered in the 100 shortest GFMs. A relevant mechanism appearing in the 100 shortest GFMs is the metabolic cycle shown in, which suggests a novel pathway to produce lysine. This metabolic cycle consumes one molecule of oaa and produces one molecule of pyr and co2 each, making a detour through propionyl-CoA (ppcoa). This cycle is an alternative mechanism to the OAADC reaction: oaa pyr + co2. However, it is less efficient than the OAADC reaction, since it involves six reactions and consumes one molecule of ATP to carry out the conversion. We refer to it as the ppcoa cycle. To the best of our knowledge, this cycle has not been previously described. Note here that other routes for the conversion of oaa to pyr have been previously described in the literature . The importance of the ppcoa cycle in the production of lysine is however questionable. The decarboxylation of oaa is generally counterproductive, since the overexpression of genes associated with enzymes producing oaa as well as the deletion of genes encoding enzymes that withdraw oaa are well-known strategies to increase the yield of lysine . A counterexample here is the decarboxylation of oaa via malate (reactions MDH and ME2) that converts NADH into NADPH, which, as mentioned above, is important for lysine production. On the other hand, it is known from studies in Aspergillus nidulans that ppcoa inhibits the activity of pyruvate dehydrogenase and thus, its presence decreases the flux through the tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle . This may be of interest for lysine production, since the increase in the yield of lysine is linked to a decrease in the flux through TCA . The overall effect requires experimental validation. We discuss below the functional feasibility of this cycle in E.coli.In this article, we have presented a novel theoretical method to compute a convex basis based on the recent work of deand Larhlimi and Bockmayr (2009). Our method was effectively applied to determine a subset of GFMs in large metabolic networks, where classical approaches fail. Though the computation of K-shortest GFMs is more expensive than the K-shortest EFMs method presented in, we here obtained a more diverse and informative set of pathways. In the analysis of pathways producing lysine obtained by the K-shortest GFMs method, we identified a new cycle via propionylCoA that produces one molecule of pyruvate and consumes one Page: 540 534540 
