Exploring the structure and function of temporal networks with dynamic graphlets Motivation: With increasing availability of temporal real-world networks, how to efficiently study these data? One can model a temporal network as a single aggregate static network, or as a series of time-specific snapshots, each being an aggregate static network over the corresponding time window. Then, one can use established methods for static analysis on the resulting aggregate network(s), but losing in the process valuable temporal information either completely, or at the interface between different snapshots, respectively. Here, we develop a novel approach for studying a temporal network more explicitly, by capturing inter-snapshot relationships. Results: We base our methodology on well-established graphlets (subgraphs), which have been proven in numerous contexts in static network research. We develop new theory to allow for graphlet-based analyses of temporal networks. Our new notion of dynamic graphlets is different from existing dynamic network approaches that are based on temporal motifs (statistically significant subgraphs). The latter have limitations: their results depend on the choice of a null network model that is required to evaluate the significance of a subgraph, and choosing a good null model is non-trivial. Our dynamic graphlets overcome the limitations of the temporal motifs. Also, when we aim to characterize the structure and function of an entire temporal network or of individual nodes, our dynamic graphlets outperform the static graphlets. Clearly, accounting for temporal information helps. We apply dynamic graphlets to temporal age-specific molecular network data to deepen our limited knowledge about human aging.Networks (or graphs) are powerful models of complex systems in various domains, from biological cells to societies to the Internet. Traditionally, due to limitations of data collection techniques, researchers have mostly focused on studying the static network representation of a given system . However, many realworld systems are not static but change over time . With new technological advancements, it has become possible to record temporal changes in network structure (or topology), corresponding to arrival or departure times of nodes or edges. Examples of temporal networks include cellular , functional brain , person-toperson communication , online social or citation networks.The increasing availability of temporal real-world networks, while opening new opportunities, has also raised new challenges for researchers. Namely, despite a large arsenal of powerful methods that already exist for studying static networks, these methods cannot be directly applied to temporal networks. Instead, the simplest approach to deal with a temporal network is to completely discard its time dimension by aggregating all nodes and edges from the temporal data into a single static network. While this would allow to directly apply to the resulting aggregate network the existing and well-established methods for static network analysis, such an aggregate or static approach loses all important temporal information from the data. To overcome this, one could model the temporal network as a series of snapshots, each of which is a static network that aggregates the temporal data observed during the corresponding time interval. Then, with such a snapshot-based network representation, one could use a static-temporal approach to study each snapshot independently via the existing methods for static network analysis and then consider time-series of the results. However, this strategy treats each network snapshot in isolation and discards relationships between the different snapshots. Clearly, both static and static-temporal approaches overlook temporal information that is important for studying a dynamic system . Therefore, proper analysis of temporal networks requires development of novel strategies that can fully exploit the temporal information from the data. This is the focus of our study.As susceptibility to diseases increases with age, studying human aging is important. However, doing so experimentally is hard due to long lifespan and ethical constraints. Network research can be used to deepen current limited knowledge about human aging that has been obtained mainly via other computational methods, e.g. analyses of gene expression or sequence data . Here, we aim to complement existing static or static-temporal (Faisal and Milenkovic,Milenkovic, 2014) network efforts to study human aging with our new temporal approach(constrained) dynamic graphlets. We already used a static graphlet-based node centrality measure , along with six other centrality measures, to study human aging (Section 1.2) (Faisal and Milenkovic,Milenkovic, 2014). Because it is hard to experimentally obtain large-scale temporal molecular network data due to limitations of biotechnologies for data collection, we integrated the current static proteinprotein interaction network of human with aging-related gene expression data to computationally infer temporal age-specific network data. Then, we predicted as agingrelated those genes whose network centralities significantly changed with age. In that study, we computed centrality of each node in each snapshot and analyzed the time-series of the results. Hence, that was a static-temporal approach. The study resulted in the set of 537 aging-related gene candidates, which we called DyNetAge, and which we validated in a number of ways. Here, we use the same temporal age-specific network data and apply our dynamic graphlets to this dataset, to see whether we can improve the prediction quality (i.e. gain additional aging-related predictions) compared with the static-temporal DyNetAge approach. Also, since the latter is quite different than our graphlet approaches from this study (as it is based on the notion of changing node centralities and on multiple measures of network topology), we also compare our dynamic graphlets to the static and static-temporal graphlet approaches from the previous sections. This allows for a fair evaluation of the effect on prediction accuracy of the amount of temporal information that each graphlet approach can consider. 
