Structural bioinformatics Exposing the co-adaptive potential of protein–protein interfaces through computational sequence design Motivation: In nature, proteinprotein interactions are constantly evolving under various selective pressures. Nonetheless, it is expected that crucial interactions are maintained through compensatory mutations between interacting proteins. Thus, many studies have used evolutionary sequence data to extract such occurrences of correlated mutation. However, this research is confounded by other evolutionary pressures that contribute to sequence covariance, such as common ancestry. Results: Here, we focus exclusively on the compensatory mutations deriving from physical protein interactions, by performing large-scale computational mutagenesis experiments for 260 proteinprotein interfaces. We investigate the potential for co-adaptability present in protein pairs that are always found together in nature (obligate) and those that are occasionally in complex (transient). By modeling each complex both in bound and unbound forms, we find that naturally transient complexes possess greater relative capacity for correlated mutation than obligate complexes, even when differences in interface size are taken into account.Regions that are important for the function and structure of proteins tend to be highly conserved. Thus, many methods have been developed to measure functional and structural constraints in proteins. Identifying correlated mutations (CMs) is one of the most direct measures for revealing the evolutionary constraints that have shaped protein structures and their interaction specificity . The idea is simple: for mutations to survive purifying selection after one protein has mutated, the fitness of its partner proteins must be rescued through compensatory mutations. Thus, a pair of positions is considered to have a CM if the amino acid identities at the position in the first protein are correlated with the amino acid identities in the partner protein . Several computational approaches have been developed to To whom correspondence should be addressed. predict coevolved residues . CM pairs have been observed both at the intra-molecular and intermolecular levels. However, the CM signal is often too weak to be detected, as it is masked by the large number of non-coevolving residues . Thus, the study of CM in proteins is often based on some assumption regarding the mechanisms that have led to the CM, such as the rate of mutations, evolutionary time scale, distances between the residues and more , which has often led to a case-by-case understanding . To overcome the low signal of CM, some studies focused on very large superfamilies, such as G-protein coupled receptors or hemoglobin . However,concluded that current methodologies for detecting CM are not suitable for large-scale inter-molecular contact prediction. One explanation for this poor performance is that it is difficult to separate the effects of physical interactions within protein complexes (co-adaptation) from other forces that can also create global patterns of co-evolution . Nonetheless, some recent research does improve these results through various normalization and filtration schemes . In addition, by analyzing lattice model proteins it was found that CM patterns are often consistent with the requirement for thermal stability . On the other hand, the rapid growth in the number of available 3D protein complexes provides a unique opportunity to extract statistical trends for the interfaces of protein complexes . Such statistics have been used, e.g. for improving predictive docking . In the work of , it was shown that protein interfaces are indeed under selection that can be traced by a CM approach. In that study, a large set of heteromeric complexes was carefully compiled and manually partitioned into transient and obligate interactions. The authors found that the interfaces of transient complexes have very little signal of CM, whereas obligate complexes show strong trends of compensatory mutations. In this study, our goal was to leverage the power of large structural datasets and recent advances in efficient modeling of protein structures to focus exclusively on the co-adaptation resultingPage: 2267 22662272. Structural modeling of correlated mutations in transient and obligate proteinprotein complexes. Modeling of the (a) two-state and (b) one-state scenarios using multi-state computational protein design is illustrated for the Ran-Importin complex (PDB code 1IBR). Interface positions are colored in yellow and green for Ran and Importin, respectively. (c) Each structure is modeled as a graph, where nodes correspond to residues and the edges between them contain their atomic-level energetic interactions summed over all atoms; for simplicity, only inter-molecular edges are depicted. The belief propagation algorithm is used to derive globally consistent amino acid probabilities for each pair of positions across the interface. (d) Three general scenarios of mutations for two positions on opposite sides of the proteinprotein interface. Only the first one describes correlated mutations between the positions, with a MI of 1. For the latter two scenarios, the MI is 0 due to a lack of correlation or a lack of mutation, respectively. from physical interaction. Thus, we set out to investigate from so-called first principles the degree to which the energetic stability of a natural proteinprotein complex underlies the phenomenon of the co-adaptability of its interface. Furthermore, our method enables us to focus on those pairs that demonstrate strong potential for co-adaptivity beyond a naive consideration of all pairs within spatial proximity. On the other hand, since our analysis is performed using a fixed-backbone procedure and enumeration of pair-wise adaptivity (Section 2), we do not expect to see many pairs of co-adapting residues that are distant in the native structure. We provide an unbiased view of a dataset of 200 protein complexes consisting of both obligate and transient heterodimeric complexes. In brief, we adopt a structural and physical energy-based model, for which the lowest energy amino acid sequences (and their side chain rotamers) occur with higher probability. In the past, this model has been successfully employed to detect both the top 100 sequence predictions for protein design and also the probability of assigning particular amino acids at any residue . This approach bypasses the need for evolutionary sequence alignments ; instead, the detailed 3D structure for each complex is used to predict the Boltzmann distribution-weighted pairwise amino acid probabilities without sequence alignment-based estimation of CM. As a measure of CM, we utilize the well-known mutual information (MI) score , which quantifies to what degree the amino acid identities at a specific residue increase our knowledge regarding the amino acids at another residue in the partner protein. We measured the MI for all pairs of positions in all proteinprotein interfaces, and we find that naturally transient complexes possess greater relative capacity for CM than naturally obligate complexes when modeled identically. In addition, we analyzed a set of 50 homodimeric complexes and find that, despite having interface sizes similar to the obligate complexes, they exhibit a large co-adaptive potential similar to that measured for transient complexes.For each particular proteinprotein complex, we modeled it in two alternative scenarios. In the two-state scenario , the two proteins can either be in their native dimeric complex or as unbound monomers, where these two states are weighted uniformly. In the one-state scenario , the two proteins are only allowed to exist in a single state as a bound dimer. The motivation behind these alternative scenarios is to model obligate-like behavior as one-state, where the two proteins are always in complex; on the other hand, transient-like behavior requires that the proteins be physically stable both in complex and as isolated monomers. Our goal was to analyze the consequences of modeling each complex in both the one-and two-state scenarios and compare these analyses between the obligate and transient complexes. To model the interface of a particular pair of proteins in either scenario, the structures of all states are simulated using a probabilistic graphical model. In the model , nodes correspond to interface residues and the edges between them consist of pseudo-physical atomic interaction energies. We employ the belief propagation algorithm to calculate all pair-wise amino acid amino probabilities , from which we determine if each particular pair exhibits CM by calculating the MI score, where higher MI values correspond to larger degrees of correlated variability between the positions (for full details, see Section 2). As was previously observed by us and others , there are many cases for which standard, off-the-shelf all-purpose protein design calculations fail. Indeed, we found here that the design procedure often over-predicts certain amino acids, such as serine (S), threonine (T) and glycine (G). Nevertheless, the unbiased simulation of over 200 protein complexes comprising 150 000 designed inter-molecular pairs of positions allowed us to overcome this shortcoming, obtaining an abundance of high level information that is both consistent and statistically significant. In our analysis, we studied a total of 210 non-redundant heterodimeric complexes: 136 naturally transient complexes and 74 naturally obligate complexes. For each such complex, the interface positions were defined as those in contact with positions in the opposing protein. For illustration, we consider PDB code 1KZY as an example of a transient complex . 1KZY is the naturally transient heteromer of tumor suppressor p53 complexed with the tandem BRCT region of p53-binding protein 1 (53BP1) . The 3D structure is composed of two p53 chains and two 53BP1 chains. We modeled the interface between one of each of these protein chains (1KZY, chains A and C). This complex is of special interest as residues of the p53 DNA-binding surface are often mutated in cancer cells. Past analysis of experimental mutations has contributed to the estimation of the conservation levels and features of the interface .shows the evolutionary profile (HSSP) for each of the positions in 1KZY, as well as the designed profiles in the oneand two-state scenarios. The number of CM increases from the modeling of the two-state scenario to the one-state scenario (from 6 to 10). Specifically, we observe that CM pairs found in the twostate scenario are almost always present in the one-state scenario as well, albeit with higher MI values (gray arrows). And, there are new CM not observed in the two-state scenario, which appear only in the one-state scenario (blue arrows). In addition, several general trends for the interface residues can be drawn from this example and others: (i) sequences predicted by computational fixed-backbone design are only moderately similar to natural sequences, with sequence identity remaining at 30 ; (ii) furthermore, the evolutionary profile is often significantly less diverse than the mutational profiles derived from the computational design approach, with only a few of the designed interface positions remaining highly conserved; (iii) an interface that is naturally rich in charged residues often retains its charged nature, although the positions at which specific amino acids appear are not always conserved; (iv) the number of glycine and serine, and to a lesser extent threonine, tends to increase relative to the HSSP profile Page: 2269 22662272The evolutionary positional sequence profiles (HSSP), as well as the predicted profiles for the two-and one-state scenarios, are shown. Representative examples of the predicted inter-molecular CM are demonstrated, where CM present in both the twoand one-state scenarios are depicted in gray, and those unique to the one-state scenario are depicted in blue. In this example, there are six CM pairs in the two-state scenario and 10 CM pairs in the one-state scenario.The main finding of this article is that the interaction interface of obligate proteinprotein heterodimers has significantly less potential for co-optimization across the complex than that of transient heterodimers (and homodimers). We hypothesize that this may derive from the fact that evolutionary processes have selected for transient interfaces with structures that have consistently maintained their ability to adapt as new partners are added to their binding repertoire (and existing partners are removed). Indeed, the energetic consideration of protein interfaces in determining their specificity (; Fromer and Shifman, 2009; Fromer and Yanover, 2009) has provided insight into the participation of these proteins in rich interactions with multiple partners and in networks in general . We propose that the unused potential for compensatory mutations observed in transient interfaces does not derive solely from the fact that these two proteins are not always found together . If this were the case, then we would expect that modeling a transient complex in the one-state scenario would not yield a larger relative increase in CM than when performing the same procedure for obligate complexes . Thus, we hypothesize that the increased concerted capacity for adaptation present in transient dimers is an intrinsic requirement of the structures of such interfacese.g. so that they possess the means to dynamically adapt to new interactions. This greater potential for pair-wise adaptability across transient interfaces is also consistent with previous research, where it was found that transient complexes have greater optimization for electrostatic stability (charge pairing) across the interface . Moreover, we have shown that the properties of the interfaces of obligate and transient complexes do not extend to the entire proteins. We found that other properties of the complexes, such as intramolecular CM modeling , the absolute size of the protein dimers, and the number of additional chains present in the solved 3D structures are not correlated with the properties of the coadaptive potential. Previously, in a study on protein complexes resulting from duplication events in yeast, CM signals could not be detected . On the other hand, we argue that by using a protein set that covers 260 complexes (including homodimers) from a broad range of environmental and phylogenetic contexts, we recover a statistically robust signal of potential biophysical CM for protein interfaces . Here, we also performed a study of protein homodimers (obligate and transient). While the global interface properties (size) resemble the obligate set, the CM properties resemble that of protein complexes that are transient in nature. The evolution of a homodimer is often associated with a large and extended interface, mainly for the purpose of geometric complementarity . Therefore, we find it interesting that the co-adaptive potential is still strong enough for multiple mutations to occur (experimentally or by computational design) without forfeiting energetic stability . In summary, we note that several high-level principles have been proposed for the evolution of structurally functional protein complexes: those that are obligate or transient (this study), having multiple partners and maintaining partners from a similar superfamily or fold . It is an intriguing possibility that the transient-like nature of homodimers and their predicted adaptability to mutations may also underlie the evolution of heterodimers that share the same fold . 
