Sequence analysis FACTERA: a practical method for the discovery of genomic rearrangements at breakpoint resolution For practical and robust de novo identification of genomic fusions and breakpoints from targeted paired-end DNA sequencing data, we developed Fusion And Chromosomal Translocation Enumeration and Recovery Algorithm (FACTERA). Our method has minimal external dependencies, works directly on a preexisting Binary Alignment/Map file and produces easily interpretable output. We demonstrate FACTERAs ability to rapidly identify breakpoint-resolution fusion events with high sensitivity and specificity in patients with non-small cell lung cancer, including novel rearrangements. We anticipate that FACTERA will be broadly applicable to the discovery and analysis of clinically relevant fusions from both targeted and genome-wide sequencing datasets. Availability and implementation: http://DNA rearrangements resulting in gene fusions represent a major class of somatically acquired structural variation in human malignancies. Notable examples include the highly recurrent association of the Philadelphia chromosome in chronic myelogenous leukemia and t(14;18)(q32;q21) translocations in follicular lymphomas . More recently, recurrent fusions involving ALK, ROS1, RET or NTRK1 were identified in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) and TMPRSS2-ERG in prostate cancer . Many structural rearrangements are oncogenic driver mutations and are increasingly therapeutically targetable . Owing to their unique junctional sequences, fusions can also serve as exquisitely sensitive biomarkers of tumor burden in cell-free DNA, which is continuously shed into diverse body fluids . Advances in targeted high-throughput sequencing have enabled interrogation of virtually any genomic region at low cost, facilitating large-scale analysis of genetic variation. Recently, we designed a 125 kb targeted sequencing panel for ultrasensitive assessment of circulating tumor DNA (ctDNA) in NSCLC . To capture fusions, we included intronic regions from genes known to participate in NSCLC rearrangements (e.g. ALK, ROS1) and developed a novel framework for fusion and breakpoint detection. Here, we describe and benchmark FACTERA, a new software tool for the discovery of genomic rearrangements, including translocations, inversions and deletions. Because previous methods for fusion discovery perform well in simulated data but tend to overestimate breakpoints in real tumor genomes , FACTERA was designed to detect fusion genes with high specificity without compromising sensitivity. Using data from NSCLC tumors and cell lines, we show that FACTERA compares favorably to previous approaches, achieves high sensitivity and specificity, and precisely and efficiently characterizes fusion genes and breakpoints in targeted sequencing data.To evaluate FACTERAs performance, we applied our 125 kb sequencing panel to eight NSCLC tumor genomes, consisting of six patients and two cell lines (NCI-H3122, HCC78), all harboring a known rearrangement in ALK or ROS1 as confirmed by FISH . FACTERA identified 16 inter-gene fusions with a median of two fusions per sample, confirming all known ALK and ROS1 fusions while precisely characterizing unknown partner genes, breakpoints and reciprocal events (Supplementary). For example, FACTERA detected a balanced SLC34A2-ROS1 translocation in HCC78, whereas in patient 9 (P9), it identified a reciprocal EML4-ALK intrachromosomal fusion (inversion) along with two novel ROS1 fusion partners (MKX, FYN). Both novel ROS1 fusion events, along with three additional fusions in three samples, were validated by qPCR (Supplementary). Moreover, in every examined instance,predicted breakpoints were experimentally verified (n = 3; Supplementary). Notably, while our capture panel was designed to target ALK and ROS1 without knowledge of their partners, FACTERA readily identified both known (EML4, KIF5B, SLC34A2 and CD74) and novel translocation partners for these genes. Next, we assessed FACTERAs sensitivity and specificity. Because all 14 fusions involving ALK or ROS1 were either experimentally confirmed or represent a reciprocal partner of a validated fusion, we considered all such events true positives. Previous whole-genome sequencing studies reported a mean of 10100 structural rearrangements per NSCLC tumor , indicating that less than one fusion should be expected within our 125 kb capture panel by random chance. The ALK and ROS1 fusions are, therefore, likely to comprise most, if not all, of the detectable structural rearrangements within our eight sequencing samples, suggesting a high sensitivity. Because the remaining candidate fusions (KRTAP5-5/KRTAP5-7) identified by FACTERA map to repetitive genomic regions, they arguably represent false positives arising from misalignment. These candidates were readily eliminated using the UCSC RepeatMasker track, resulting in 100 specificity without affecting true positives (Supplementary Methods). If this step was omitted, FACTERA achieved a specificity of 88 (14 of 16 fusions). Using the same datasets, we then compared FACTERA results with five previous fusion detection methods (, Supplementary) . Only Socrates and DELLY achieved a sensitivity of 100 relative to FACTERA; however, both reported many more candidate fusions . As such, we examined their outputs for concordant predictions, reasoning that any such events might represent true fusions. From41400 candidates compared, only 15 fusions were found in common between them, of which 14 were also identified by FACTERA (Supplementary). Because the remaining candidates were unique to each method, we assessed whether they could be false positives. We evaluated HCC78 genomic DNA by PCR for putative fusions called by either DELLY or Socrates, but not both (Supplementary, Supplementary). Consistent with our concordance analysis, none of these fusion candidates could be detected, suggesting they arose from library preparation or sequencing-related artifacts. In contrast, primers targeting SLC34A2-ROS1 (a fusion identified by all three methods) yielded the correct product (Supplementary). Finally, a 715 bp fusion within EIF3E (patient P7) was predicted by both DELLY and Socrates, but missed by FACTERA. While FACTERA was originally used to detect intergene fusions, when reapplied to detect inter-and intragenetic events (Section 2), the same fusion was identified along with all 
