Structural bioinformatics Fast, accurate, and reliable molecular docking with QuickVina 2 Motivation: The need for efficient molecular docking tools for high-throughput screening is growing alongside the rapid growth of drug-fragment databases. AutoDock Vina (Vina) is a widely used docking tool with parallelization for speed. QuickVina (QVina 1) then further enhanced the speed via a heuristics, requiring high exhaustiveness. With low exhaustiveness, its accuracy was compromised. We present in this article the latest version of QuickVina (QVina 2) that inherits both the speed of QVina 1 and the reliability of the original Vina. Results: We tested the efficacy of QVina 2 on the core set of PDBbind 2014. With the default exhaustiveness level of Vina (i.e. 8), a maximum of 20.49-fold and an average of 2.30-fold acceleration with a correlation coefficient of 0.967 for the first mode and 0.911 for the sum of all modes were attained over the original Vina. A tendency for higher acceleration with increased number of rotatable bonds as the design variables was observed. On the accuracy, Vina wins over QVina 2 on 30 of the data with average energy difference of only 0.58 kcal/mol. On the same dataset, GOLD produced RMSD smaller than 2 A on 56.9 of the data while QVina 2 attained 63.1. Availability and implementation: The C source code of QVina 2 is available at (www.qvina.org).AutoDock Vinaalso referred to as Vinaemploys the iterated local search global optimizer to search for the minimum-energy docking conformations . Subsequently, QuickVinareferred to as QVina 1 hereinafterenhanced Vinas computation time via heuristics that prevents unnecessary local searches. As proof of concept, QVina 1 needs high exhaustiveness level compared to the original Vina . Here, we present the most recent QuickVinareferred to as QVina 2 with improved reliability. QVina 2 avoids the unnecessary local searches in a similar manner to QVina 1. In contrast to QVina 1, however, QVina 2 misses fewer necessary local searches thanks to a new procedure to test if a randomized docked conformation is significant for local search. This improves QVina 2s reliability in discovering the minimum-energy docking conformation.The efficacy of QVina 2 was assessed on the core set of the 2014 release of the PDBbind dataset which contains 195 proteinligand complexes. These are considered as high-quality benchmarks for evaluating various docking/scoring methods . Vina, QVina 1 and QVina 2 were first compiled on a CentOS release 6.0 x86_64 machine with 16 Intel Xeon 2.27-GHz X7560 CPUs and 98 GB of RAM. The same testing methodology (i.e. the search space definition as well as the RMSD calculation) as that observed in the original Vina was adopted. For each receptorligand complex in the benchmark set, all three docking tools were given the same random number seed and initialized with the same randomized ligand conformation. We then explicitly set both the number of CPUs available for use and the exhaustiveness level to 8. For completeness of comparison, we also docked the same receptorligand complexes using GOLD 5.2 and Dock 6.6.summarizes the accelerations attained by QVina 1 and QVina 2 over the original Vina under different numbers of active rotatable bonds in the range of. Summary on the complete range can be found in the supplementary materials.then shows the RMSD between the actual PDBbind conformations and the predicted ones produced by employing various docking tools. Defining a successful prediction as one with RMSD less than 2 A , the numbers of successes and failures of the various docking tools are summarized in. The results indicate that QVina 2 has the highest consistency with Vina among the other docking tools. On the accuracy against the experimental conformations, Dock 6.6 is slightly more accurate than QVina 2 at the expense of long computation time. Dock 6.6 attained 127 successes while QVina 2 achieved 123. Meanwhile, GOLD 5.2 only had 111 successes.QuickVina 2 is a fast and accurate molecular docking tool. Tested against 195 proteinligand complexes that compose the core set of the 2014 release of the PDBbind using default exhaustiveness level of 8, QVina 2 successfully attained up to 20.49-fold acceleration over Vina. The Pearsons correlation coefficient between Vinas and QVina 2s binding energy was 0.967 for the first predicted mode and 0.911 for the sum of all predicted modes. It is also witnessed that QVina 2 is more accurate than GOLD 5.2 and is only slightly less accurate than Dock 6.6. This shows that QVina 2 has paved theFast, accurate, and reliable molecular docking with QuickVina 2way for some high-throughput and sufficiently accurate virtual screening of molecular libraries. This in turn brings great value to the fragment-based computer-aided drug design. 
