Fast and accurate inference of local ancestry in Latino populations Motivation: It is becoming increasingly evident that the analysis of genotype data from recently admixed populations is providing important insights into medical genetics and population history. Such analyses have been used to identify novel disease loci, to understand recombination rate variation and to detect recent selection events. The utility of such studies crucially depends on accurate and unbiased estimation of the ancestry at every genomic locus in recently admixed populations. Although various methods have been proposed and shown to be extremely accurate in two-way admixtures (e.g. African Americans), only a few approaches have been proposed and thoroughly benchmarked on multi-way admixtures (e.g. Latino populations of the Americas). Results: To address these challenges we introduce here methods for local ancestry inference which leverage the structure of linkage disequilibrium in the ancestral population (LAMP-LD), and incorporate the constraint of Mendelian segregation when inferring local ancestry in nuclear family trios (LAMP-HAP). Our algorithms uniquely combine hidden Markov models (HMMs) of haplotype diversity within a novel window-based framework to achieve superior accuracy as compared with published methods. Further, unlike previous methods, the structure of our HMM does not depend on the number of reference haplotypes but on a fixed constant, and it is thereby capable of utilizing large datasets while remaining highly efficient and robust to over-fitting. Through simulations and analysis of real data from 489 nuclear trio families from the mainland US, Puerto Rico and Mexico, we demonstrate that our methodsAdmixed populations, such as Latinos and African Americans, emerged from the encounter of a few genetically-diverged ancestral populations which have since been mixing for a relatively small number of generations. Due to recombination events, each chromosome of an admixed individual is a mosaic of chromosomal regions originating from the different ancestral populations. The problem of local ancestry inference is to determine, for each genomic position, the ancestral origin of each of the two chromosomes. Highresolution local ancestry inference from genomewide genotype data forms an essential analysis step in medical genetics in identification of disease genes through admixture mapping as well as in increasing power in association studies in admixed populations . Local ancestry inference is also useful in the study of population genetic processes, such as recombination , selection and migration , thus providing important insights into human history and demographics. In addition, ancestry inference has been recently shown to be of critical value in pharmacogenomics: a recent study associated the Native American ancestry with the riskLatino populations of the Americas, such as Mexicans or Puerto Ricans, arose by the influx of Europeans into existing Native American populations. Subsequently, African individuals were introduced into the population . Thus, most of the genomes of current Latino populations can be modeled as an admixture of chromosomes from three ancestral populations with various global proportions of European, Native American and West African ancestries [e.g. 0.45:0.5:0.05 for Mexicans and 0.67:0.13:0.2 for Puerto Ricans (. Correspondingly, we simulated Latino admixed haplotypes as mosaics of segments taken from three of the HapMap phase 3 haplotype panels . Unless otherwise noted, we used the phased haplotypes from the CEU (117 haplotypes), CHB+CHD (169) and YRI (115) panels in our simulations of admixed haplotypes and phased haplotypes from the TSI (117), JPT (169) and LWK (115) panels as proxy reference data in local ancestry inference. The haplotype sets used for generating the simulations data and reference data are therefore disjoint. Our use of East Asian haplotypes to represent the Native American haplotypes was motivated by the small sample sizes of existing Native American panels and by the presence of European gene flow into some of these populations. It is likely, however, that the use of East Asian haplotypes will overestimate the accuracy of local ancestry inference. We performed the analyses on Chromosome 10, restricted to the SNPs present on the Illumina Human 1 M SNP array so as to obtain a realistic SNP density and a typical genomic LD pattern. Following standard approaches , we simulated admixed chromosomes by performing a random walk over the HapMap haplotypes. Distance to the next crossover was sampled from the exponential distribution with parameter 1/ g, where = 10 8 is the average recombination probability along the genome per base per generation, and g = 15 is the approximate number of generations in admixture for Latinos. At a crossover event the new ancestry is chosen given the mixture-specific proportions, and a specific haplotype is drawn uniformly from the corresponding reference set. This procedure was used to generate 400 haplotypes, which were then joined in pairs to form 200 diplotypes. Several metrics have been proposed to measure the performance of local ancestry inference methods . Here weWe introduced novel methods for accurate local ancestry inference in multi-way mixtures of populations such as Latinos. Through simulations and analysis of real Latino family data, we demonstrated that our methods attain superior accuracy and scalability compared with current state of the art methods for local ancestry inference. Our methods are implemented as an open source software package for the genetics community. As future work, we mention the incorporation of varying recombination rates into the parameter estimation step of our approach, as well as an adaptive selection of the window length as a function of the genetic distance among ancestral populations at any locus in the genome. In our simulations we have assumed non-population specific recombination rates, however it is straightforward to incorporate population-specific recombination rates into our model by using appropriate recombination maps in the training of the ancestral HMMs. Finally, we note that methods for local ancestry inference in multi-way admixed populations are an active area of research . A systematic comparison of the performance of these methods on Latinos as well as admixtures of 3 ancestral populations merits further study. 
