Sequence analysis Fast and accurate read alignment for resequencing Motivation: Next-generation sequence analysis has become an important task both in laboratory and clinical settings. A key stage in the majority sequence analysis workflows, such as resequencing, is the alignment of genomic reads to a reference genome. The accurate alignment of reads with large indels is a computationally challenging task for researchers. Results: We introduce SeqAlto as a new algorithm for read alignment. For reads longer than or equal to 100 bp, SeqAlto is up to 10 faster than existing algorithms, while retaining high accuracy and the ability to align reads with large (up to 50 bp) indels. This improvement in efficiency is particularly important in the analysis of future sequencing data where the number of reads approaches many billions. Furthermore, SeqAlto uses less than 8 GB of memory to align against the human genome. SeqAlto is benchmarked against several existing tools with both real and simulated data. Availability: Linux and Mac OS X binaries free for academic use are available atResequencing with next-generation sequencers has become a popular method for characterizing genetic variation between individuals. A critical step in a typical resequencing workflow is accurate alignment of genomic reads to a reference genome. The resulting variants called from the aligned reads strongly depend on the accuracy of this initial alignment stage. In this article, we introduce SeqAlto, a fast and accurate read alignment tool that reliably align reads with large insertions and deletions (indels). Next generation sequencers, such as HiSeq2000 from Illumina, are generating ever increasing volumes of data. Simply aligning these reads to a reference genome is a daunting task. The computational cost of sequencing is rapidly approaching the experimental cost. In the recently published 1000 genomes pilot article , it was stated that a 199 node cluster was used to align all of the reads to the reference genome with MAQ . This kind of computational resource is not available to most laboratories or is not feasible in a clinical setting. At over 1 billion reads generated per run for a Illumina HiSeq2000 sequencer, the computational capacity required to align such large datasets in a reasonable amount of time far exceeds the capability of small laboratories or clinics. This is especially true if any analysis needs to be repeated with different parameters. In addition to increases in the throughput of each sequencer, maximum read lengths of all sequencing platforms are steadily increasing beyond 100 bp. This poses a problem for many popular short-read aligners as shown in Section 3. On the other hand, SeqAlto is able to exploit this increased read length to improve the speed as well as accuracy of the alignment process. In fact, SeqAlto is not suitable for read lengths much less than 100 bp when aligning to the human genome. This is not a significant limitation as the majority of future sequencing platforms are able to output read lengths4100 bp and we expect this length to only increase in the future. There are numerous read aligners available to researchers today. They can be broadly grouped into four classes: hashing the genome, hashing the reads, FM-index or sorting. Snap , Stampy , Novoalign (http://novocraft.com/), BFAST , GASSST and SHRiMP2 index the genome with a hashtable of k-mers. BFAST and SHRiMP2 use large spaced seeds to improve sensitivity. GASSST uses a large array of filters to improved alignment speed. Snap follows a similar approach to SeqAlto by using large continuous seeds. MAQ and SeqMap hash the reads. This approach is useful when the reference is small such as a transcriptome. Bowtie2 , BWA , BWA-SW and SOAP2 rely on the BurrowsWheeler Transform (BWT) and FMindex. This approach has been shown to be very efficient for short reads and large genomes. However, we will see that it is problematic for longer reads (Section 3). BWA-SW stands out as it finds local alignments of the read rather than global alignments. Slider and Syzygy use a sorting and merging approach. This approach places a high demand on the storage system to be fast. A selection of these read aligners is compared to SeqAlto in this article. Both real and simulated sequencer reads are used for the comparison. In addition to comparing the alignments generated, the variants called from the alignments are also compared.SeqAlto is compared to Snap, Bowtie2, SOAP2 BWA, Novoalign and Stampy in terms of alignment accuracy and efficiency. Snap is a new read aligner that follows a similar approach to SeqAlto, but puts its emphasis on alignment speed. Bowtie2, SOAP2 and BWA are based on the BWT and are among the most popular tools for read alignment. Novoalign is a commercial read alignment package not based on the BWT and is among the most accurate read aligners. Stampy is a relatively new alignment tool that is targeted towards resequencing with Illumina reads similar to SeqAlto. Stampy was run in hybrid mode, as recommended by the documentation, where a combination of BWA with a hash-based approach is used. SeqAlto is run in two modes, one with only a sub-set (Section 5.1) of seeds in the genome indexed (SeqAlto) and the other with all seeds indexed (SeqAlto-all). A simulated dataset (Section 4) with single and paired-end reads is used to compare each algorithm. The algorithms supporting gapped alignment are compared at aligning reads with various indel sizes. The algorithms are also compared with real Illumina HiSeq 2000 data (Short Read Archive, accession number SRX100628). Alignment accuracy does not always indicate variants called will be accurate and comprehensive. For example, an aligner may place many reads very accurately, but fail to place a few polymorphic reads. This could result in increased confidence in already confident variants, while missing other variants. Hence, variants are called from simulated paired-end reads and also the real dataset to directly evaluate the effect of each aligner on the variants called. All simulations were run with a single thread on an 8-core 2.27 GHz Intel Xeon X7560 unless otherwise specified. An alignment is called correct if its start location is within 50 bp of the simulated location not counting bases inserted or deleted. The effect of varying this correctness criteria is discussed in the Supplementary Material. For SeqAlto, 22-bp and 28-bp seeds were used for 100-bp and 200-bp reads, respectively. For Snap, 20-bp and 22-bp seeds were used for 100-bp and 200-bp reads, respectively as suggested by the author. Exact parameters used for each program can be found in the Supplementary Material. The Err given in each table refers to the percentage aligned incorrectly among the reads satisfying each uniqueness criteria. The elapsed time recorded for Novoalign and Stampy includes the index loading time since they do not provide an option to record only the alignment time. Empirically, the index loading time is independent of the number of reads aligned and not more than 100200 s.Overall, SeqAlto is an efficient alignment tool that targets the future of resequencing where reads are long and high quality. When aligning longer reads, SeqAlto is faster than most existing tools while retaining the ability to accurately align complex variants. This is particularly important for the high volume of resequencing that will be required as sequencing enters clinical applications. For convenience, SeqAlto outputs in the common SAM format that is compatible with numerous downstream analysis tools. The comparison of alignment algorithms is primarily performed with simulated reads as real reads do not have a clear ground truth available. On simulated reads SeqAlto is shown to be faster than most current tools and able to accurately align reads with large indels. When aligning real Illumina reads, SeqAlto maintains its efficiency advantage over most of the tools. This advantage is expected to increase as read quality improves. The ability to align reads with large indels is particularly evident when variants are called from the aligned reads. Both GATK and Samtools were able to correctly call more indel variants from SeqAltos aligned reads from both real and simulated data compared to all the other tools except Stampy. In the cases where less variants were called, SeqAlto was more accurate. There is a clear trend towards longer read lengths among high-throughput sequencers. SeqAlto has been shown to be ideal for aligning long high-quality reads for the purpose of resequencing. We expect that the large seed approach taken by SeqAlto to be the standard approach for read alignment as the volume and length of reads increase. 
