Genetics and population analysis Ferret: a user-friendly Java tool to extract data from the 1000 Genomes Project The 1000 Genomes (1KG) Project provides a near-comprehensive resource on human genetic variation in worldwide reference populations. 1KG variants can be accessed through a browser and through the raw and annotated data that are regularly released on an ftp server. We developed Ferret, a user-friendly Java tool, to easily extract genetic variation information from these large and complex data files. From a locus, gene(s) or SNP(s) of interest, Ferret retrieves genotype data for 1KG SNPs and indels, and computes allelic frequencies for 1KG populations and optionally, for the Exome Sequencing Project populations. By converting the 1KG data into files that can be imported into popular pre-existing tools (e.g. PLINK and HaploView), Ferret offers a straightforward way, even for non-bioinformatics specialists, to manipulate, explore and merge 1KG data with the users dataset, as well as visualize linkage disequilibrium pattern, infer haplo-types and design tagSNPs. Availability and implementation: Ferret tool and source code are publicly available at http://limou sophie35.github.io/Ferret/.The 1000 Genomes (1KG) Project is an international consortium to establish a human genome map of genetic variations (SNPs, indels and CNVs) with a minor allele frequency as low as 0.10.5 in the coding regions and 1 in the rest of the genome in multiple reference populations (1000 Genomes). This publicly available, near-comprehensive catalogue of human genome diversity contributes to improve the human reference sequence, and furthers understanding of the evolutionary history of populations and of the genetic contribution to diseases and traits. The 1KG variants can be directly queried through the 1KG browser, however the process to access some information can become tedious, requiring a good knowledge of the website architecture and many clicks. Raw and annotated data are regularly released on the 1KG ftp server, but manipulating these large data files requires advanced bioinformatics skills. Finally, 1KG offers the VCF to PED converter to transform SNP genotype data of a locus from the 1KG .vcf files into files that can be loaded into the HaploView visualization tool . We developed Ferret as a user-friendly tool to easily extract genotype data from 1KG SNPs and indels into files that can be imported into popular pre-existing tools, while also computing allelic frequencies. Ferret unique features are to: (i) handle SNP and indel genotype data; (ii) extract data from a locus, gene(s) or SNP(s) of interest; (iii) calculate SNP, indel and CNV allele frequencies in 1KG and Exome Sequencing Project (Exome Variant Server, NHLBI GO Exome Sequencing Project (ESP), Seattle, WA, http://evs.gs. washington.edu/EVS/) populations; (iv) create PLINK and HaploView output files; and (v) provide a user-friendly tool for the non-bioinformatics specialists. Ferret is therefore a straightforward program that permits easy manipulation, exploration and visualization of 1KG genotype data with well-known pre-existing tools. 
