Structural bioinformatics Folding RNA/DNA hybrid duplexes Motivation: While there are numerous programs that can predict RNA or DNA secondary structures, a program that predicts RNA/DNA hetero-dimers is still missing. The lack of easy to use tools for predicting their structure may be in part responsible for the small number of reports of biologically relevant RNA/DNA hetero-dimers. Results: We present here an extension to the widely used ViennaRNA Package (Lorenz et al., 2011) for the prediction of the structure of RNA/DNA hetero-dimers.Nucleic acids have many important functions in biological systems, such as information carriers, catalysts and regulators. Both variants, DNA and RNA, can form complex structures by base pair interactions. The pattern of WatsonCrick or wobble base pairs a molecule forms is called the secondary structure. A main difference between RNA and DNA is due to their usage in biological systems: while DNA builds a dimer with its reverse complement almost all the time, RNA, being mostly single stranded, is more prone to fold back onto itself. However, if DNA is single stranded (e.g. during replication, transcription, repair or recombination), it will also form intramolecular base pairs. There are several examples where RNA and DNA interact via base pairing, generating a structure called R-loop. They protect CpG (CG dinucleotide regions in the genome) islands from being methylated . The stability of DNA/mRNA hybrids is reported to have an influence on the copy number of repeats and can impair transcription elongation, promoting transcription-associated recombination . Moreover, during the intensive search for new functional transcripts, rendered possible by next-generation sequencing technology, at least 1000 novel lincRNAs were identified that may act as regulators of transcription, and one possibility to do this is via base pairing between RNA and DNA (see Guttman and Rinn, 2012 for a recent review). As a final biological example, DNA/RNA hybrids play a role within the CRISPR pathway in bacteria and archaea . On a technical side, RNA/DNA dimers are often used in micro-array or PCR experiments. The ability to computationally investigate the properties of the structures of interacting RNA and DNA molecules would help in the analysis of these dimers. While a number of programs exist that can predict RNA or DNA secondary structures (For a review, see e.g.) or even their dimers, there is, to our knowledge, no program that also includes the possibility to predict the full secondary structure of RNA/DNA hetero-dimers. This may be due to the lack of compiled energy parameters, as there are only stacking energies available today. We introduce here a possibility to predict the secondary structure of such hetero-dimers within the widely used ViennaRNA Package.In the absence of programs that can deal with RNA/DNA dimers, researchers have resorted to simply treating both parts of the dimer as RNA. To test the effect of applying the right (DNA or RNA) parameters to the single molecules and using explicit RNA/DNA interactions, we chose ANRIL, a long non-coding RNA that is suspected to have a DNA target sequence, and one of its putative targets. In order to simulate the size of the transcription bubble, we chose a sliding window approach with DNA pieces of length 50, step size 25 for our computations. Even though ANRIL (1500 nt) is much longer than the pieces of DNA bound to it, we sometimes observe a dramatic effect on the structure of the hybrid molecule. The tree edit distance of the hybrid structures predicted with RNA parameters and with our hybrid approach rises up to 900, and the structure of the binding site can vary greatly (Another example for the usefulness of the mixed parameters is the strand dependency of R-loop formation . A r GAA n trinucleotid repeat can form R-loops while its reverse complement r UUC n cannot. The non-symmetric mixed parameters can explain that: addition of another trinucleotid will give 4.1 kcal/mol for r GAA , but only 2.6 kcal/mol for r UUC . In contrast to RNA or DNA parameters, the mixed parameters can also explain the changes in R-loop formation of other trinucleotides investigated (see Supplementary). 
