Structural bioinformatics FTSite: high accuracy detection of ligand binding sites on unbound protein structures Motivation: Binding site identification is a classical problem that is important for a range of applications, including the structure-based prediction of function, the elucidation of functional relationships among proteins, protein engineering and drug design. We describe an accurate method of binding site identification, namely FTSite. This method is based on experimental evidence that ligand binding sites also bind small organic molecules of various shapes and polarity. The FTSite algorithm does not rely on any evolutionary or statistical information, but achieves near experimental accuracy: it is capable of identifying the binding sites in over 94 of apo proteins from established test sets that have been used to evaluate many other binding site prediction methods. Availability: FTSite is freely available as a web-based server atLocating ligand binding sites is of fundamental importance for a range of applications, such as the structure-based prediction of function, the elucidation of functional relationships among proteins, protein engineering and drug design. A number of methods aimed at ligand binding site identification have been developed; these include geometric analyses, energy calculations, evolutionary considerations, machine learning and various combinations of these approaches. Over the years, improvements in methodology have led to an increase in the success rate of binding site detection as the top prediction from 52 by SURFNET to 83 by VICE for the LIGSITE CSC test set of 48 unbound protein structures , which has been used to evaluate many binding site detection methods. The VICE algorithm has not been implemented as a server, and the best server currently available is MetaPocket 2.0 , which seeks consensus among eight different methods and reaches 80 accuracy for the unbound LIGSITE CSC test set. Here we describe the energy-based method FTSite, which is capable of identifying the binding sites with 94 To whom correspondence should be addressed. success rate as the top prediction for the same LIGSITE CSC test set, and has been implemented as a server.FTSite was evaluated using apo structures from two test sets of proteins that have been previously used in the evaluation of other binding site prediction methods. These test sets are the LIGSITE CSC set and QSiteFinder set . FTSite achieves accuracy rates of 94 and 97 for the LIGSITE CSC and QSiteFinder sets, respectively, when determining the binding site as the highest ranked consensus site. For each test set, we employed the same assessment criteria that were used in the respective previous studies (Supplementary Material). A comparison to other methods is shown in. FTSite was able to identify the ligand binding site using only the top ranked prediction in a number of difficult cases. Two examples are shown in(see the Supplementary Material for other examples); the ligand from the holo structures is superimposed on the results of the apo structures for comparison. In both cases, conformational differences between the holo and apo structures make binding site detection difficult. In the case of -amylase, the loop formed by residues V99, G100 and D101 closes down on the ligand in the holo form, yielding a better defined ligand binding site. Similarly, in the apo form of HIV-2 protease the ligand binding site). Right: HIV-2 protease (PDB ID 1HSI (apo) and 1IDA (holo)). (c) Top: on the LIGSITE CSC test set, FTSite has an accuracy of 94 using only the top ranked prediction of the ligand binding site, and 98 using the top three. Bottom: on the QSiteFinder test set, FTSite has an accuracy of 97 using only the top ranked prediction. is very open, and becomes well formed only upon ligand binding. Despite the poorly defined binding sites present in the apo structures of these two proteins, FTSite identifies the binding site as the top ranked prediction.Key to the success of FTSite is the use of multiple molecular probes rather than a single probe as implemented in most other energybased methods. Screening by NMR and X-ray crystallography shows that the binding sites of proteins possess a tendency to bind small organic compounds that vary in size, shape and polarity, thus improving the robustness of FTSite to conformational changes. Although individual probes may bind to other cavities, the largest clusters of multiple probes occur in ligand binding sites . Thus, FTSite does not rely on surrogate measures of ligand-binding propensity such as pocket volume, cavity depth or the ability of binding non-polar spheres. Due to its strong biophysical basis, the method provides high accuracy without evolutionary considerations. We note that solvent mapping also had success in identifying druggable binding sites in proteinprotein interfaces . 
