ABC: a tool to identify SNVs causing allele-specific transcription factor binding from ChIP-Seq experiments Motivation: Detection of allelic imbalances in ChIP-Seq reads is a powerful approach to identify functional non-coding single nucleotide variants (SNVs), either polymorphisms or mutations, which modulate the affinity of transcription factors for chromatin. We present ABC, a computational tool that identifies allele-specific binding of transcription factors from aligned ChIP-Seq reads at heterozygous SNVs. ABC controls for potential false positives resulting from biases introduced by the use of short sequencing reads in ChIP-Seq and can efficiently process a large number of het-erozygous SNVs. Results: ABC successfully identifies previously characterized functional SNVs, such as the rs4784227 breast cancer risk associated SNP that modulates the affinity of FOXA1 for the chromatin. Availability and implementation: The code is open-source under an Artistic-2.0 license and ver-sioned on GitHub (https://github.com/mlupien/ABC/). ABC is written in PERL and can be run on any platform with both PERLGenome-wide association studies (GWAS) have identified thousands of single nucleotide variants (SNV) representing genomic loci associated with human traits and disease . The causal variant(s) underlying each association are hard to identify because most of the associated loci fall outside of annotated genes . ChIP-Seq allows for the identification of transcription factor (TF) binding sites across the genome . Functional studies have shown that many trait/disease-associated loci modulate the affinity of TFs for chromatin . Noncoding somatic mutations found in tumors can also modulate TF binding to promote tumor growth and progression . The generation of ChIP-seq data for TFs in normal cells and tumors provides an opportunity to directly assess the functional effect of risk-variants and somatic mutations on TF binding. This creates a need for a computational tool to systematically identify SNVs imparting an allelic imbalance in TF binding to the chromatin. To eliminate alignment biases existing tools incorporate the alignment of the ChIP-Seq reads to two separate genomes. The use of two representative parental genomes assumes a diploid set of chromosomes. Therefore, the applicability of these tools to cancerThe rs4784227 SNP imposes allele-specific binding of FOXA1 in MCF7 cells based on ChIP-qPCR . Using ABC against FOXA1 ChIP-Seq data from MCF7 cells reports increased binding intensity of FOXA1 to the variant versus reference allele of the rs4784227 SNP. Specifically, 53 aligned reads from the FOXA1 ChIP-Seq data map to the variant allele while 26 map to the reference allele (P 3.18 10 3 ) . No strand or position biases are observed (P 0.05) and a high processed signal is reported at this site (normalized read depth 128). In addition, we applied ABC genome-wide to identify SNVs modulating binding affinity of the PU.1 (or SPI1) (Supplementary Information) and ZNF143 in GM12878 cells. ABC provides the ability to identify allelic imbalance in TF binding, similar to a traditional allele-specific ChIP-qPCR assay and to what is reported by Ni and colleagues . However, we do not attempt to call SNVs from the ChIP-Seq data and we control for potential biases in the alignment across alleles. ABC can be used to help understand the role of SNVs associated with traits or disease by directly assessing their capacity to modulate TF binding to the chromatin.are sequenced from both ends in ChIP-Seq assays. The reads (grey) are short and less than the DNA fragment size selected for sequencing. Reads map to the positive (solid grey) and negative (dashed grey) strands. The TF binding site (black) is inferred by extending the reads in a strand-specific manner. (B) The SNVs location within the TF binding site can be inferred from the aligned reads. The distribution of total, positive and negative strand reads should be equal between alleles. The coverage window of a SNV is limited to twice the read length used (dashed green lines). (C) Allele-specific binding of FOXA1 caused by the rs4784227 SNV. The reads containing the reference (red) and variant (blue) alleles, as well as the distribution of the positive (solid grey) and negative (dashed grey) reads are shown (left). The interpretation of the results is illustrated (middle) indicating the preference of the TF (green) for the variant allele. The processed signal, peak, is shown (right) Funding 
