Structural bioinformatics GalaxyGemini: a web server for protein homo-oligomer structure prediction based on similarity A large number of proteins function as homo-oligomers; therefore, predicting homo-oligomeric structure of proteins is of primary importance for understanding protein function at the molecular level. Here, we introduce a web server for prediction of protein homo-oligomer structure. The server takes a protein monomer structure as input and predicts its homo-oligomer structure from oligomer templates selected based on sequence and tertiary/quaternary structure similarity. Using protein model structures as input, the server shows clear improvement over the best methods of CASP9 in predicting oligomeric structures from amino acid sequences. Availability: http://galaxy.seoklab.org/Many proteins self-assemble into oligomers to perform their biological functions . For example, certain enzymes form substrate-binding pockets at their dimer interfaces , whereas antibodies form oligomers to create additional binding sites, increasing effective binding affinity via a multivalent effect (Pluckthun). Many membrane proteins also form oligomers for effective signal transduction . Knowledge of the protein oligomeric state is therefore crucial for understanding protein function at the molecular level. In the case of experimental protein structures deposited in the Protein Data Bank (PDB), oligomeric states may be annotated by the authors or can be assigned from crystallographic information through the Protein Interfaces, Surfaces and Assembly (PISA) database . When such information is not available, e.g. for protein model structures, prediction of the oligomeric state is required. Recent studies have suggested that homology-based homo-oligomer prediction methods can be more powerful than ab initio methods . Methods for prediction of protein oligomeric structures were assessed in a blind fashion for the first time in the 9th Critical Assessment of Protein Structure Prediction (CASP9;). In this experiment, participants were asked to predict homo-oligomer structures from amino acid sequences. Surprisingly, no method performed better than navenave predictors that take the top-ranking protein by HHsearch (SodingSoding, 2005) as a template, implying that the current methods for prediction of oligomeric structures are ineffective, with substantial room for improvement. In this context, we introduce a new web server GalaxyGemini for predicting protein homo-oligomer structure, which shows clear improvement over navenave predictors on two test sets.Identification of the correct number of subunits in an oligomer was evaluated by measuring the relative accuracy. For more precise evaluation of the predicted structure, the contact agreement score (S agree ) was measured, which reflects the fraction of correctly modeled interface contacts in the complex. Both measures were used in the CASP9 assessment and explained in Supplementary Information. GalaxyGemini increased relative accuracy from 75.4 (for the navenave predictor NaveSeqScoreNaveSeqScore that takes the HHsearch top ranker by sequence score) to 79.5 for the training set (PISA benchmark set) and from 69.8 to 77.1 for the test set (CASP9 set) . The sum of S agree over the targets increased from 74.7 to 88.0 for the training set and from 13.6 to 17.6 for the test set when experimental monomer structures were used as input (Supplementary). When tertiary structures predicted by GalaxyTBM were used as input for the CASP9 set, the sum of S agree increased from 9.4 to 12.1 (d for target-based comparison). GalaxyGemini outperforms all other CASP9 predictors including navenave predictors by the two measures, implying that GalaxyGemini may be successfully applied to sequence-based oligomeric structure prediction. A successful example of CASP9 target T0576 (3na2) highlights the strength of GalaxyGemini (Supplementary). This protein forms a dimer through an inter-chain-sheet. The best template determined by the NaveSeqScoreNaveSeqScore (2grg) is monomeric, but GalaxyGemini successfully selects a dimer template (3fm2), which has an oligomer structure similar to the native structure, resulting in a high S agree of 0.742. 
