Genome analysis Gap5—editing the billion fragment sequence assembly Motivation: Existing sequence assembly editors struggle with the volumes of data now readily available from the latest generation of DNA sequencing instruments. Results: We describe the Gap5 software along with the data structures and algorithms used that allow it to be scalable. We demonstrate this with an assembly of 1.1 billion sequence fragments and compare the performance with several other programs. We analyse the memory, CPU, I/O usage and file sizes used by Gap5.With the latest wave of DNA sequencing technologies , the number of individual fragments readily available for both mapping and de novo assemblies has grown many fold. This has often been coupled with a shortening of each individual fragment. As a consequence, a full mapping of the entire human genome may conceivably have as many as a billion fragments. While many applications of new sequencing technologies make use of mapped assemblies, de novo sequence assembly is still common. These may contain misassemblies or require further finishing work to resolve gaps . To progress from the draft standard toward finished sequence, we need tools capable of both viewing and editing our large-scale assemblies. Traditional algorithms used in earlier sequence assembly viewers and editors such as Gap4 , Consed , HawkEye and EagleView tend to scale poorly with the number of fragments. For example, Gap4s memory and CPU usage typically scale linearly with the number of fragments in the assembly. It became clear that the underlying data structures in these older tools are insufficient for the data volumes that we now routinely see. Recently several viewers including SAMtools , MapView , IGV (http://www.broadinstitute.org/ igv), Tablet and NGSView have been released that aim to reduce the algorithmic complexity To whom correspondence should be addressed. and memory footprint. However, the solutions typically employed by these programs are only amenable for read-only access, with the exception of NGSView that can perform some minor editing tasks. In addition to algorithmic efficiency, the large increase in the number of DNA fragments has put a strain on our storage requirements. By using data compression methods, the storage burden can be greatly reduced, with the BAM file format being one such recent example. When coupled with an index, compressed BAM files can be randomly accessed. We present the Gap5 program: a sequence assembly viewer and editor. This encompasses both base by base editing operations as well as high-level contig rearrangements (complementing, breaking and joining). Being able to change data has a substantial impact on the choice of data structures and file formats, which are described below. We also demonstrate the compression techniques used in Gap5 and compare their effectiveness to existing tools.For an initial test, we chose to use the data presented in the MapView paper: 6.6 million 44 bp reads aligned in a single 44 Mb contig. We converted this file to a variety of formats taking care to include the appropriate data (including sequence names, bases and quality) supported by all formats and no more. We then measured the CPU time taken to start up the program, open the assembly and view sequence assembly at the start of the first contig.presents these results as dataset A, along with the programs native file sizes. See the Supplementary Material for a more complete break down on the assembly file sizes. As can be seen, the programs mostly cluster into two groups, with EagleView, Gap4 and Consed being very demanding on both memory and CPU. These three also had the largest disk space requirements. The last fourMapView, IGV, SAMtools and Gap5 all demonstrate acceptably low resource requirements for both CPU and memory, while also using substantially less disk space. NGSView is very CPU and memory efficient, but is inefficient on disk space usage. Note that the CPU time and memory also includes the constant overhead of launching the programs, so it may not accurately reflect the relative positions of the last five programs when faced with much larger datasets. To further test scalability we used a 1000 genomes (http:// www.1000genomes.org/) project SAM file containing 1.1 billion reads from the NA19240 sample. Note that this BAM file contained only mapped data with the only auxiliary records being the read Page: 1702 16991703uses a simple database rather than a flat file, I/O efficiency could be a concern. So to test I/O efficiency we compared Gap5 with Gap4 and SAMtools tview on the 6.6 million read dataset A. The results indemonstrate that the start up cost of Gap5 is low as it does not load the entire index into memory, but a consequence of using a database means that we require many more disk seeks than SAMtools. Gap4 in comparison is very I/O intensive as it loads partial information about every sequence when it opens the database. When scrolling along a contig view both Gap4 and Gap5 demonstrate a minimal amount of additional data loaded due to onthe-fly caching in Gap5 and having preloaded most of the data in Gap4. It is clear that Gap5s approach of blocking 1024 sequences together per database record dramatically reduces the number of I/O calls. SAMtools demonstrates an apparent lack of data caching in this test, but was still fast and responsive. The complexity of editing operations is where Gap5 really stands out against Gap4. The inability to reposition large numbers of sequences without individually editing each one causes Gap4 to generate millions of I/O calls when breaking contigs in two or joining them together. To verify the efficiency of Gap5 against a 1 billion read assembly, we repeated these tests on dataset B. As can be seen in, edits still require a relatively small amount of I/O. The speed was also acceptable: to perform all 10 breaks, joins, substitutions and insertions took 12 s of CPU time. We could not compare editing of this dataset against Gap4 due to time and memory constraints, but for viewing purposes we also tested SAMtools. In contrast with the smaller set, we observe that SAMtools reads far more data whenopening the assembly. This is due to completely loading the BAM index file into memory. The lack of caching in SAMtools is again evident during the scrolling test. To evaluate storage size, we experimented with a variety of compression algorithms on the sam files exported from Gap5 and compared these with Gap5s native format, using both the lz77 (zlib) and lzma2 (xz-utils) algorithms. For speed reasons, we only tested this with the smaller dataset A.presents these findings. The PAQ algorithm and variants have won the Hutter prize for compression multiple times and can be considered as at the cutting edge for general purpose compression, regardless of the cost in CPU. While not practicalit took 26 h to compress the sam file it is a useful baseline to compare ourselves against. For comparison, tg_index produced the Gap5 database in 144 s when using lz77 and 502 s using lzma2. It is clear that Gap5 has not had to compromise greatly on storage space in order to achieve both random access and editability of data. Tg_index has the ability to ignore certain types of data or to replace them with blank data, such as producing minimal names, setting all quality values to zero, or even replacing all base calls Page: 1703 16991703with N. From this, an analysis of the storage per type of data is presented in. It is clear that the quality values constitutes the bulk of the file size, with the DNA sequence taking up less than 1 bit per base call. This figure is substantially less than the expected 2 bits per base due to redundancy in the sequence depth (7) and so clearly the results will differ when tested on other datasets.We have demonstrated that we can keep and sometimes improve upon the CPU, memory and I/O efficiency of the next-generation assembly viewers, while also supporting editing capabilities. This is a marked improvement over the Gap4 program. However, it is clear that performance is just one aspect and utility also needs to be considered. Currently, Gap4 offers a much richer set of tools than Gap5 and is also available on a broader range of platforms. Over time, we expect to duplicate the most important Gap4 features in Gap5 and also plan to port Gap5 to Microsoft Windows. There are still some performance issues even with Gap5 as intrinsically certain algorithms will not be possible to get below O(N) complexity, such as plotting an entire chromosome or identifying all local alignments in an entire genome. Some algorithms can benefit from precomputation of results at a cost of increased storage, which so far we have only implemented for consensus caching. We have outlined ways that the binning tree can be used to store additional precomputed depth data. This aspect of Gap5 is still largely unexplored, but we envisage a variety of additional cached tracks for rapid visualization in the template display. Further analysis of the I/O patterns reveals that the bulk of I/O calls while breaking contigs are manipulating the bin tree. SAMtools and the UCSC Genome Browser both use trees with eight children per node, rather than the binary tree implemented in Gap5. Implementing a similar change to Gap5 should further improve I/O performance. It is likely that users will want to keep both their standard alignment format data, such as BAM files, as well as using Gap5 for viewing and possibly editing. The fact that Gap5 is efficient in space helps, but it is clear that this is an additional cost over and above the storage requirements for the input data. One possible solution to this is to observe that indexing just the sequence positions (tg_index-d blank) is only an extra 5 on top of the BAM format. It may be possible to get Gap5 to extract names, sequences and qualities from BAM while still retaining the positional index for use in the template display. The next logical step is to implement a copy-on-write scheme where only edited sequences get added to the Gap5 database. This will bring the additional overheads of editing to an acceptable level. 
