Gene expression Gathering insights on disease etiology from gene expression profiles of healthy tissues Motivation: Gene expression profiles have been widely used to study disease states. It may be possible, however, to gather insights into human diseases by comparing gene expression profiles of healthy organs with different disease incidence or severity. We tested this hypothesis and developed an approach to identify candidate genes associated with disease development by focusing on cancer incidence since it varies greatly across human organs. Results: We normalized organ-specific cancer incidence by organ weight and found that reproductive organs tend to have a higher mass-normalized cancer incidence, which could be due to evolutionary trade-offs. Next, we performed a genome-wide scan to identify genes whose expression across healthy organs correlates with organ-specific cancer incidence. We identified a large number of genes, including genes previously associated with tumorigenesis and new candidate genes. Most genes exhibiting a positive correlation with cancer incidence were related to ribosomal and transcriptional activity, translation and protein synthesis. Organs with enhanced transcriptional and translational activation may have higher cell proliferation and therefore be more likely to develop cancer. Furthermore, we found that organs with lower cancer incidence tend to express lower levels of known cancer-associated genes. Overall, these results demonstrate how genes and processes that predispose organs to specific diseases can be identified using gene expression profiles from healthy tissues. Our approach can be applied to other diseases and serve as foundation for further oncogenomic analyses.pathological conditions to identify disease biomarkers and gain insights into pathophysiological processes. Few studies, however, have compared data between healthy tissues to identify normal tissue-specific pathways that predispose or contribute to disease. One study focused on the expression of disease-associated genes in healthy tissues and found that they tend to be overexpressed in tissues where their disruption causes pathology , but this remains a largely unexplored area. Herein, we wanted to develop a method that takes advantage of gene expression profiles from healthy organs to determine new candidate genes and processes associated with complex diseases. Although many diseases are tissue specific, for others disease incidence and severity varies widely across organs. It is plausible that variation in particular organ features affects their predisposition to pathophysiological mechanisms and therefore identifying such features will provide clues on disease etiology. Given that largescale gene expression data is available for the major human organs , the basic premise behind this work is that it may be possible to gather insights into human disease by comparing gene expression profiles of healthy organs with differences in disease incidence or severity. Our aim in this work was to test this hypothesis and develop a method for identifying genes and processes associated with organ-specific disease incidence using gene expression data from healthy tissues. Because cancer can originate in multiple organs, we focused our proof of concept analysis on cancer incidence. Cancer is caused primarily by alterations in the genome of the affected cells , yet organ characteristics may predispose or protect from tumorigenesis. In fact, there is a great variation in the incidence of cancer across organs. Differences in cell proliferation and turnover have been put forward as an explanation, though the topic remains controversial . A previous study found that while gain-of-function cancer genes (i.e. oncogenes) are overexpressed in tissues more associated with cancer, loss-of-function cancer genes (i.e. tumor suppressor and caretaker genes) are underexpressed in such tissues . In order to study the differences in cancer incidence between different human organs, we conducted a genome-wide correlation study between cancer incidence normalized for organ weight and gene expression patterns using microarray data from healthy tissues. Our results reveal a large number of genes and processes whose expression is associated with cancer incidence and show it is possible to employ gene expression profiles across healthy organs toIn this study, we sought to determine whether it is possible to gain insights into disease development processes by comparing gene expression profiles of healthy organs with organ-specific disease incidence and, if so, develop a method that performs such analyses. Organ-specific disease incidence can be obtained from epidemiological studies, but because larger organs will have more cells we think it is crucial to normalize disease incidence by organ weight. Organ-specific gene expression profiles are publicly available in databases such as the GNF dataset . Genes can then be scanned for those whose expression correlates with mass-normalized disease incidence and common pathways detected by functional enrichment analysis methods . Known disease-associated genes can also be analyzed for statistically significant patterns across organs of varying disease incidence. To test our approach, we focused on the large observed differences in cancer incidence between human organs. Data on cancer incidence rates by site was obtained from the USA (United States Department of Health and Human). Since our focus was on intrinsic biological features of each organ and its cells, we tried to minimize effects of environmental factors and as such used lung cancer incidence data from never-smokers. To account for the differing numbers of cells between organs, tissue-specific cancer incidence rates were normalized by organ weight (see Section 2). Nonetheless, it is interesting to note that cancer incidence did not correlate with organ weight (Supplementary); yet, because our focus is on cellular properties that may predispose to cancer theuse of mass-normalized cancer incidence will only accentuate those properties. After normalizing, we obtained mass-normalized organ-specific cancer incidences for multiple organs . The prostate had the highest cancer incidence rate, whereas skeletal muscle had the lowest rate. There was a large variance in mass-normalized cancer incidence, spanning six orders of magnitude from prostate to skeletal muscle. Interestingly, five of the eight tissues with the highest massnormalized cancer incidence are related to reproduction . To identify genes and processes associated with cancer incidence, we mapped mass-normalized cancer incidence with organs in the microarray GNF tissue-specific gene expression dataset (see Section 2). We then correlated the gene expression signal of each microarray probe across organs with the mass-normalized organ cancer incidence. Overall, we found 161 significant probes (BenjaminiHochberg test; see Section 2). The genes corresponding to the top 20 probes are displayed inand include several ribosomal genes as well as proteins that are part of the transcriptionalmachinery. In addition, there were some poorly studied genes, like C6orf48, C6orf106 and TACC1 . Two other significant genes of note were taurine upregulated 1 (TUG1) and WD repeat and SOCS box-containing 1 (WSB1), both of which positively correlated with cancer incidence (P = 1.110 4 and 1.810 4 , respectively). The vast majority of top probes (132 out of 160) correlated positively with cancer incidence. In the top 20, only C6orf106 showed a negative correlation with cancer incidence. Our full results are available as Supplementary Material and on our website (http://genomics.senescence.info/cancer/tissues.html). The significant probes were matched with their gene symbols and were then analyzed in DAVID to identify common functions and processes. Probes with positive and negative correlations with cancer incidence were analyzed separately. Among genes with a positive correlation with cancer incidence, we identified four significant clusters using DAVID, all of which containing categories with a significant enrichment even after BenjaminiHochberg correction . By far, the most significant cluster from DAVID included ribosomal genes, genes involved in transcription and protein synthesis. Among genes that correlated negatively with cancer incidence, only categories related to muscle were significant and thus assumed to be a bias caused by the low cancer incidence of skeletal muscle and heart (data not shown). Given the above potential bias due to skeletal muscle, and because muscle has been reported to have unique ribosomal biogenesis , the analysis described above was repeated after eliminating skeletal muscle and heart. However, ribosomal activity still appeared in DAVID analyses as the top, highly significant cluster (enrichment score of 8.1) with ribosome (Benjamini = 9.910 13 ), translational elongation (1.310 10 ) and protein biosynthesis (7.610 11 ) having highly significant enrichments. Similarly, we repeated our analysis using cancer incidence data from an Arab population (see Section 2), in order to validate our results in a population under different environment and in particular one in which alcohol consumption is low, and results were largely confirmatory with the top cluster (enrichment score of 15.1) encompassing highly significant categories involving transcription, translation and ribosomes (data not shown). We then investigated whether the expression of genes in which mutations have been associated with cancer may be related to organ-specific cancer incidence. Several genes in which mutations have been associated with cancer were among our significant genes, including RPL22 (P = 5.610 5 ) and SFPQ (7.810 5 ). Although there were slightly more probes with a positive correlation with organ-specific cancer incidence than a negative correlation (59.4 and 40.6, respectively), among probes (n = 218) targeting genes in which mutations have been associated with cancer about three-fourth had a positive correlation with organ-specific cancer incidence while one-fourth had a negative correlation. This difference was statistically significant (P 10 5 ). Lastly, for each tissue we counted the number of genes expressed in a tissue-specific fashion (see Section 2) and determined whether this in turn could also be related to mass-normalized cancer incidence, but found no significant correlation (data not shown).Gene expression analyses of pathological conditions have been widely used, yet few studies have focused on comparisons across healthy tissues to identify normal tissue-specific pathways that contribute to disease. One can consider human organs as different experimental samples with varying disease incidences and understanding these differences could provide new biological insights into disease etiology. As a proof of concept, we focused on cancer incidence and developed a simple method to determine genes and processes associated with organ-specific cancer incidence. Elucidating the biological reasons for differences in cancer incidence among organs could help our understanding, diagnosis and treatment of cancer. Although to our knowledge no systematic studies have been conducted to date, it is expected that the number of cells within a tissue is proportional to cancer risk . We were hence surprised to find that organ cancer incidence does not correlate with organ weight (Supplementary). On the other hand, the two heaviest organs in our analysis (muscle and bone) have relatively low cancer incidence, whereas the organ with the highest incidence (prostate) is a relatively small organ. Our results provide no evidence then that organ size determinants, like progenitor cell number and p53-mediated stress and apoptosis , contribute to cancer. Since no doubt a lower number of cells will make it less likely to develop cancer, however, there must be strong features in cells from tissues with high cancer incidence that predispose them to cancer development. To find these features, we used mass-normalized cancer incidence to control for number of cells in organs and emphasize cellular properties that may predispose to cancer. To our knowledge, our work is the first to calculate cancer incidence across organs controlling for the organs weight. This normalization provides a measure of organ-specific cancer incidence that can serve as basis for further studies, in particular since a large variation in mass-normalized cancer incidence was observed for healthy human organs. Strikingly, we observed that reproductive organs were overrepresented among those with the higher rates of cancer incidence . This may reflect evolutionary trade-offs involving selective pressures related to reproduction. Reproductive organs may be under stronger evolutionary selection, because reproduction is more important than late-life survival and thus alleles that favor reproduction early in life will be selected for even if they are deleterious later in life, as predicted by evolutionary theory . Indeed, although cancer is an agerelated disease, it is interesting to note that testicular cancer is 
