Genetics and population analysis Gencrypt: one-way cryptographic hashes to detect overlapping individuals across samples Meta-analysis across genome-wide association studies is a common approach for discovering genetic associations. However, in some meta-analysis efforts, individual-level data cannot be broadly shared by study investigators due to privacy and Institutional Review Board concerns. In such cases, researchers cannot confirm that each study represents a unique group of people, leading to potentially inflated test statistics and false positives. To resolve this problem, we created a software tool, Gencrypt, which utilizes a security protocol known as one-way cryptographic hashes to allow overlapping participants to be identified without sharing individual-level data.Genome-wide association studies (GWASs) have identified over 1000 genomic loci associated with numerous diseases and traits . These associations are often discovered by meta-analysis of summary statistics from multiple, independent cohorts. One key concern of this type of approach is that the same individuals may be present in multiple cohorts, especially if the cohorts recruit from overlapping regions. The presence of duplicate individuals in multiple studies may affect meta-analysis results, producing inflated test statistics and spurious associations . However, sharing individual-level data across research groups is often not permissible due to Institutional Review Board (IRB) restrictions, thus inhibiting researchers from directly assessing whether individuals are present in multiple datasets (overlapping individuals). To address this issue, we have created a software suite, Gencrypt, which takes advantage of a security protocol known as one-way cryptographic hashes. One-way cryptographic hashes are a form of security algorithms that alter input in such a way that the resulting output bears no resemblance to the original content (referred to as digesting To whom correspondence should be addressed. the input), and attempt to produce a unique output for each unique input (referred to as a collision when this fails . Cryptographic approaches have already successfully been applied to other fields in biology, such as DNA forensics . The advantages of using such an algorithm in the context of GWASs is that the original genotype specificity is kept, but the privacy that is necessary to maintain when using IRB and consent-form protected data are not compromised. As a result, we can use one-way cryptographic hashes on genetic information, and compare the resulting outputs against one another to securely ascertain identical individuals between datasets used in GWASs.We tested Gencrypt on two datasets derived from real genotype data. The first test dataset was based on African American individuals collected from Maywood, IL and genotyped on the Affymetrix 6.0 SNP array . A total of 743 individuals were broken into two subsets of 421 and 422, with 100 individuals overlapping between the two groups. Twenty thousand SNPs were randomly chosen from a full set of 859 332 SNPs available as a test of the programs robustness to methods of SNP selection, and to show Gencrypts utility with a small number of SNPs used. A variety of SNP groupings per hash were tested, ranging from 10 SNPs per hash to 150 SNPs per hash. To test the performance of Gencrypt with a fixed rate of missingness, missing genotypes were given a randomly chosen genotype based on the missing SNPs alleles, individuals were included in both halves of the dataset, and then 1 of genotypes were removed randomly across all individuals. For every SNP grouping tested, all 100 duplicate pairs of individuals were identified. Additionally, when fewer than 40 SNPs per group were used per hash, other familial relations were picked up, such as first-degree relatives. However, using 40 SNPs per hash is not recommended due to the potential insecurity hashes based on SNP groupings of these sizes have. When 50 SNPs per group were used, none of the 177 562 non-duplicate pairs of individuals produced a spuriously overlapping hash. For groups of 50, 100 and 150 SNPs, the percentages of identical hashes for duplicate individuals ranged from 50 to 100 (Supplementary). While including more SNPs per hash does decrease the total number of identical hashes found between two overlapping individuals, using 150 SNPs per hash still produces 50 of total hash comparisons per duplicate pair as being identical. To test Gencrypts performance with the addition of genotyping error, a random 0.1, 0.2, 0.5, 1 and 2 of SNPs in both halves of the Maywood data had a single allele altered (miscalled) in order to simulate a range of genotyping error rates. These datasets were then run through Gencrypt using a hash group size of 150 SNPs. For genotyping error rates of 0.1, 0.2 and 0.5, all duplicate individuals were still identified (with decreasing amounts of overlapping hashes between identical individuals). A total of 99 out of 100 individuals were identified with 1 genotyping error, and 15 out of 100 individuals were identified with 2 genotyping error (Supplemental). While Gencrypt is robust to low, and realistic, levels of genotyping error, SNPs should still be selected to minimize the effects of genotyping error. The second dataset used was the publicly available US GoKinD study . A group of 1825 individuals from the USA and Canada with long-term type 1 diabetes, these were genotyped on the Affymetrix 5.0 SNP array and five duplicate pairsof individuals, genotyped separately, had been identified in the QC process. In this case, missing data were maintained as is to test the performance of Gencrypt in a real dataset. Twenty thousand SNPs were randomly extracted from the full dataset of 233 100 SNPs, and size groupings of 150 were used. The resulting output was compared against itself, with results between people of the same individual IDs dropped and not considered duplicates. For three of the five known duplicate pairs, 93 of their hash outputs were identical . The other two pairs of duplicate individuals were still detected, with 28.1 and 6 of hash outputs being identical. In each of these two pairs, one of the two input genotypes had missingness rates 1 (1.3 and 1.23). Despite the relatively low proportion of identical hash outputs, these five pairs were the only pairs identified with any duplicate hashes among the 1.710 6 pairs compared, demonstrating the high specificity of Gencrypt. 
