Genome analysis Gene and translation initiation site prediction in metagenomic sequences Motivation: Gene prediction in metagenomic sequences remains a difficult problem. Current sequencing technologies do not achieve sufficient coverage to assemble the individual genomes in a typical sample; consequently, sequencing runs produce a large number of short sequences whose exact origin is unknown. Since these sequences are usually smaller than the average length of a gene, algorithms must make predictions based on very little data. Results: We present MetaProdigal, a metagenomic version of the gene prediction program Prodigal, that can identify genes in short, anonymous coding sequences with a high degree of accuracy. The novel value of the method consists of enhanced translation initiation site identification, ability to identify sequences that use alternate genetic codes and confidence values for each gene call. We compare the results of MetaProdigal with other methods and conclude with a discussion of future improvements.Metagenomes from environmental samples can contain thousands of species and often cannot be sequenced to sufficient coverage to assemble each individual genome. Even with enough coverage, the correct binning and assembly of the various sequences still present many challenges, making it likely that at least for the immediate future, metagenomic sequencing will continue to produce a large number of small contigs.Assessing the performance of metagenomic gene prediction tools remains a difficult task, due to the lack of experimentally verified gene sets. Tools such as Metagene Annotator, MetaGeneMark, Orphelia and FragGeneScan, have compared their predicted results with GenBank annotations . By using this method, complete genomes from Refseq are sampled to a certain level of coverage at various fragment sizes (either with or without simulated errors), and the predicted results are compared with the positions of the GenBank-annotated genes in the fragments. Unfortunately, this methodology has one significant drawback. Since the gene calls in Refseq have not been experimentally verified, it is likely some of them are incorrect. Error rates have been shown to be greater in genomes containing high GC content . In addition, some translation initiation site predictions are likely to be incorrect as well, which could have an impact on gene predictions as fragment sizes become smaller. Nonetheless, the chosen genomes represent a good cross section across bacteria, Archaea and all levels of GC content. Therefore, we decided to analyze the results of MetaProdigal on the 50 genome set from the MetaGeneMark publication, according to the same standards described previously . 
