Gene function prediction using semantic similarity clustering and enrichment analysis in the malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum Motivation: Functional genomics data provides a rich source of information that can be used in the annotation of the thousands of genes of unknown function found in most sequenced genomes. However, previous gene function prediction programs are mostly produced for relatively well-annotated organisms that often have a large amount of functional genomics data. Here, we present a novel method for predicting gene function that uses clustering of genes by semantic similarity, a nave Bayes classifier and enrichment analysis to predict gene function for a genome that is less well annotated but does has a severe effect on human health, that of the malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum. Results: Predictions for the molecular function, biological process and cellular component of P.falciparum genes were created from eight different datasets with a combined prediction also being produced. The high-confidence predictions produced by the combined prediction were compared to those produced by a simple K-nearest neighbour classifier approach and were shown to improve accuracy and coverage. Finally, two case studies are described, which investigate two biological processes in more detail, that of translation initiation and invasion of the host cell. Availability: Predictions produced are available at http://www .bioinformatics.leeds.ac.uk/bio5pmrt/PAGODAThe massive improvements in DNA sequencing technology have led in the past decade to ever more genomes being sequenced. Most newly sequenced genomes contain a large number of genes whose function cannot be inferred through conventional homology methods such as BLAST and annotating the function of these genes has been aided in recent years by the production of large high-throughput datasets. These datasets can be based on genomic sequence data To whom correspondence should be addressed. using methods such as gene fusion and phylogenetic profiles or they can be derived from experimental methods such as yeast two-hybrid screens and microarray expression . However, these datasets are often noisy and incomplete, which can often lead to problems of low reliability and limited coverage when the data are used to predict gene function. To address these problems, several gene function prediction programs have been produced that combine multiple datasets using machine learning techniques to create synergistic predictions, see the review of MouseFunc for examples . Most of these programs rely on a guilt by association approach where a query proteins function is inferred from annotated proteins with similar biological attributes. Many different approaches have been taken but they can effectively be split into either supervised or unsupervised learning methods. With a supervised approach, a training dataset is created from which an algorithm learns a set of rules that can then be used to predict the most likely annotation of a gene absent from the training set. Alternatively, an unsupervised approach can be taken where the data are separated into multiple clusters. Then, for each cluster, a statistical test is applied to see whether a cluster is overrepresented with a particular annotation. Functions can be defined using several different databases but the most popular is the Gene Ontology (GO;). The GO database is structured as a directed acyclic graph, in which the terms form a hierarchy where more specific GO terms also inherit the more general terms above them. Early attempts at gene function prediction often overlooked these high levels of similarity between terms, but more recently programs have attempted to address this problem particularly by the inclusion of semantic similarity measures. Unfortunately, these programs all have drawbacks.could only produce predictions for genes that already have an annotation, whileboth use a semantic similarity measure but only with a relatively simple K-nearest neighbour (KNN) classifier approach and only using microarray and proteinprotein interaction data. Also, these two papers limit themselves to human and Saccharomyces cerevisaie, both organisms which have relatively well-annotated genomes. Gene function prediction programs for organisms that are less well annotated but have significant effects on humans, such as thecausative agent of the most deadly form of malaria Plasmodium falciparum, are few. The sparse annotation of such genomes and, thus, lack of training data makes predicting gene function more challenging. Therefore, in this article, we collate a large, disparate collection of datasets for P.falciparum and present a novel method for gene function prediction that attempts to address this problem. Our program contains three steps: (i) clustering genes using a semantic similarity measure into functional clusters; (ii) calculating the probability that a pair of genes belong to the same functional cluster using a Bayes classifier; (iii) using these probabilities, we employ an enrichment analysis algorithm to predict the function of the gene. We call this program PAGODA (Protein Assignment by Gene Ontology Data Associations).To assess our method, a leave one out cross-validation procedure was performed for each GO category on all P.falciparum genes with a GO annotation (excluding IEAs). Plasmodium falciparum genes whose functions can be inferred from annotated orthologous proteins were also excluded where orthologs were defined by the OrthoMCL . A prediction was defined as a success if the NES score of the annotated function was one of three highest for that specificity level. Coverage was defined as the proportion of total number of genes for which a prediction could be made at that specificity level. Accuracy and coverage are shown for classifiers based on each dataset separately and all datasets combined are shown in, and given in Supplementary Tables 13. As expected,shows that generally PAGODA achieves a greater degree of success with more general clusters, partly because there are fewer clusters to classify into but also because more genes are clustered at the more general levels and, therefore, more data are available to inform the prediction. The proteinprotein interaction data, consisting mainly of the yeast two-hybrid data of, produced poor results and the quality of this dataset has been previously questioned . The most accurate methods were the domain and gene conservation methods, although the former achieved 60 coverage and latter only 15. The combined method, which uses the predictions of all the other methods, achieved the highest coverage but not the highest accuracy. This is likely to be due to the ability of the combined method to predict the function of genes for which only sparse data are available but at the cost of decreased confidence in the prediction. The result is that the overall accuracy of the combined method is reduced.the three different GO classes. Each letter denotes the use of a single separate data source to make predictions and results for the combined data sources are also shown (f = Affymetrix, b = Bozdech, d = domain, c = gene conservation, u = gene fusion, n = gene neighbourhood, m = mass spectrometry, p = proteinprotein interactions and a = combined) and the number represents the specificity level with one being the most general and eight being the most specific. A different coloured oval is used for each method to show where the majority of the methods results are (black = Affymetrix, blue = Bozdech, dark green = domain, orange = gene conservation, purple = gene fusion, grey = gene neighbourhood, red = mass spectrometry, yellow = protein protein interactions, light green = combined). 
