Geneious Basic: An integrated and extendable desktop software platform for the organization and analysis of sequence data The two main functions of bioinformatics are the organization and analysis of biological data using computational resources. Geneious Basic has been designed to be an easy-to-use and flexible desktop software application framework for the organization and analysis of biological data, with a focus on molecular sequences and related data types. It integrates numerous industry-standard discovery analysis tools, with interactive visualizations to generate publication-ready images. One key contribution to researchers in the life sciences is the Geneious public application programming interface (API) that affords the ability to leverage the existing framework of the Geneious Basic software platform for virtually unlimited extension and customization. The result is an increase in the speed and quality of development of computation tools for the life sciences, due to the functionality and graphical user interface available to the developer through the public API. Geneious Basic represents an ideal platform for the bioinformatics community to leverage existing components and to integrate their own specific requirements for the discovery, analysis and visualization of biological data. Availability and implementation: Binaries and public API freely available for download at http://www.geneious.com/basic, implemented in Java and supported on Linux, Apple OSX and MS Windows. The software is also available from the Bio-Linux package repository at http://nebc.nerc.ac.uk/news/Research in the biosciences increasingly depends upon bioinformatics for the effective organization and analysis of biological data and experimental results. Having access to the appropriate bioinformatics tools is crucial to the success of any research project. The field of bioinformatics itself has previously been segregated into the parallel realms of data organization To whom correspondence should be addressed. Current affiliation: Google Inc.(databases, access, integration, web services and search tools) and data analysis (efficient algorithms and statistical modeling). As a result, a large proportion of bioinformatics work involves the chaperoning of data from a variety of sources through a pipeline of analysis tools. This approach typically involves a number of ad hoc labor-intensive steps to convert file formats and create transitional file types. Geneious Basic was created to provide a general framework for research-focused bioinformatics tasks to overcome these challenges and take advantage of modern computing trends. Highlights of the platform include automated database searching, data backup functionality and an extensible API for the integration of novel bioinformatics analysis tools.The Geneious Basic graphical user interface comprises of three main panels, a variety of pull-down menus and many right-clickthe relationship of a MT-CO1 sequence from an unknown source with similar public sequence. Sequences were identified from Genbank using BLAST. Sequences were downloaded then aligned using the Geneious Aligner and a phylogenetic tree built using PhyML. All of these steps were performed within Geneious Basic. functions for common bioinformatics analyses. Geneious Basic displays selected file(s) in a variety of different ways including sequence view (linear and circular), dotplot view, query-centric alignment view, protein domain view, 3D structure view, text view and notes. A number of analysis algorithms are implemented within Geneious Basic. For a given document, the user can select from among the appropriate analysis tools to process the data; for example, in the case of a sequence document, the user may choose to perform a BLAST search for a given query sequence against a specific online repository, align against other sequences or generate protein translations. The combinations of available tools and document types allow for the implementation of complex workflows in a single, consistent environment . Geneious Basic has an active community of plugin developers, using the public API to contribute third-party plugins and additional functionality within Geneious. The Species Delimitation Plugin, a plugin for summarizing measures of phylogenetic support for userselected collections of taxa on user-supplied trees , is one example of scientific research leveraging the Geneious public API for publishable academic research. At the time of the writing of this manuscript, there were nine available plugins for Geneious Basic , from plugins wrapping industry standard 
