Generative probabilistic models for protein–protein interaction networks—the biclique perspective Motivation: Much of the large-scale molecular data from living cells can be represented in terms of networks. Such networks occupy a central position in cellular systems biology. In the protein protein interaction (PPI) network, nodes represent proteins and edges represent connections between them, based on experimental evidence. As PPI networks are rich and complex, a mathematical model is sought to capture their properties and shed light on PPI evolution. The mathematical literature contains various generative models of random graphs. It is a major, still largely open question, which of these models (if any) can properly reproduce various biologically interesting networks. Here, we consider this problem where the graph at hand is the PPI network of Saccharomyces cerevisiae. We are trying to distinguishing between a model family which performs a process of copying neighbors, represented by the duplicationdivergence (DD) model, and models which do not copy neighbors, with the BarabsiAlbert (BA) preferential attachment model as a leading example. Results: The observed property of the network is the distribution of maximal bicliques in the graph. This is a novel criterion to distinguish between models in this area. It is particularly appropriate for this purpose, since it reflects the graphs growth pattern under either model. This test clearly favors the DD model. In particular, for the BA model, the vast majority (92.9) of the bicliques with both sides 4 must be already embedded in the models seed graph, whereas the corresponding figure for the DD model is only 5.1. Our results, based on the biclique perspective, conclusively show that a nave unmodified DD model can capture a key aspect of PPI networks. Contact:Many real-life systems can be modeled as complex networks, or graphs, of interacting components. Although the study of such largescale networks is not new, there has recently been much renewed interest in this field. This is due to technological advances of two types: (i) the collection of data which depict large networks in high-resolution detail, and (ii) the development of computational tools for the analysis of data. Among the well-studied examples of such networks are the World Wide Web, citation networks, neuronal connections, metabolic networks, ecological webs and To whom correspondence should be addressed. more (for reviews, see). One of the best studied network types is the proteinprotein interaction (PPI) network. Protein interactions play a crucial role in the execution of biological functions in any model system. Accordingly, a systematic mapping of PPI on the scale of the whole proteomethe interactomehas recently become available for major model systems from yeast to human . Although far from complete, PPI network mappings have revealed topological and dynamic features of the interactome that are common to numerous model systems . However, the overall size of interactomes differs substantially between human and other multicellular model organisms, including the Drosophila melanogaster and the Caenorhabditis elegans . PPIs are usually represented by an undirected graph (network). Every node in such a network corresponds to a protein, and there is an edge between two nodes, if the two corresponding proteins interact physically. Such networks have been mapped for several organisms using high-throughput (HTP) techniques such as Yeast2-Hyrbid (Y2H) Systems and co-immunoprecipitation . HTP techniques are prone to a high rate of false positives and false negatives. Saccharomyces cerevisiae (bakers yeast) is the organism with the most comprehensive, high-coverage interactome mapping. Other PPI networks, such as those of Escherichia coli and Helicobacter pylori were investigated as well, but they are far from being complete . The PPI networks of human, Drosophila melanogaster and Caenorhabditis elegans are more complex, due to their multicellular nature. Specifically, interactomes are harder to define, as they vary between different cell types, and subsequently, harder to map. The PPI network of yeast was refined over the years, followed by a critical assessment of data quality Chua, 2008 19. While the topology of the partial PPI network obtained from each of the main technologies is different , the combination of PPI data from such complementary experimental technologies resulted in a near complete map . For most organisms, the interaction data are still partial and thus topological assessment of these networks is prone to sampling biases . It is not obvious how to infer direct pairwise interactions from HTP techniques that focus on protein complexes (i.e. co-immunoprecipitation). This is especially challenging when complexes of several proteins are considered. To document andPage: i143 i142i148The proper modeling of PPI networks is a major challenge from two perspectives: the theoreticalmathematical and the biological one.In the search for the best model to explain experimental data, one should be aware of several pitfalls originating in the methodology or in the data itself. A key source of difficulty is the quality of available data. In particular, PPI data originate from several different sources of varying levels of quality and reliability. The systematic curation of such data provides at least a partial remedy. Much of the yeast PPI network information originates from Y2H experiments. This method suffers from a high false positive rate . However, with advances in experimental design , consistently contaminating proteins are more easily eliminated. Thus, the quantity, quality and reliability of PPI networks have drastically improved . In addition, large-scale co-immunoprecipitation experiments allow the incorporation of labile protein interactions into PPI networks . To test the validity of our conclusions, we have repeated the described protocol by omitting the Y2H data, leaving 50 of the data, mainly extracted from co-immunoprecipitation experiments, and from X-ray and stable isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture (SILAC)-based tandem affinity purification (TAP) technologies. This subset shows essentially the same results. We use the distribution of maximal bicliques in a graph as a yardstick against which to compare different generative models of graphs. We have investigated the PPI network of S.cerevisiae. It transpires that the graphs generated by the DD model are in much better agreement with the actual network than those generated by the BA model. Clearly, both models can be expanded and refined in various ways, and we have restricted ourselves to the basic versions of either model. In addition, other models may also be suggested. Indeed, other closely related models have also been shown to give rise to many large bicliques . Still, we believe that our findings are rather indicative of the general picture. In conclusion, we have suggested a new perspective on the question of PPI network modeling. The distribution of maximal bicliques is not only an intuitive method to distinguish between models, but also effective and decisive. Our results, based on the biclique perspective, conclusively show the ability of the DD model to capture a key essence of PPI networks. 
