Systems biology Genes related to differentiation are correlated with the gene regulatory network structure Motivation: Many secondary messengers, receptors and transcription factors are related to cell differentiation. Their role in cell differentiation can be affected by their position in the gene regulatory network. Here, we test whether the properties of the gene regulatory network can highlight which genes and proteins are associated with cell differentiation. We use a previously developed purely theoretical algorithm built to detect nodes that can induce a state change in Boolean gene regulatory networks, and show that most genes predicted to participate in differentiation in the theoretical framework are also experimentally known to be associated with such differentiation. These results show that genes related to differentiation are associated with specific features of the genetic regulatory network. The proposed algorithm produces a better classification than simple network measures such as the nodes degree or centrality. Boolean networks were used in many previous theoretical models. Here, we show a direct application of such networks to the detection of genes and subnetworks related to differentiation. The subnetwork emerging from the genes and edges that are predicted to be associated with differentiation are the most active molecular pathways experimentally described to be involved in cell differentiation. Availability and implementation:During differentiation, stem cells are converted to become new types of cells. The converted cells can become similar to the cells that triggered the differentiation, which is often the case with differentiation of adult stem cells, or they may become a different cell type. This can happen in transdifferentiation or during differentiation of tissue stem cells from a nearby non-neighboring cell population. For example, the cells in the mesenchyme may send differentiation signals to the stem cells of the epithelium . Some genes and their products are classically related to cell differentiation in the literature, as they play a key role in at least one case where one cell type is converted to another. These genes include, e.g. the members of signaling pathways related to cell differentiation such as the epidermal growth factor (EGF) signaling pathway , the transforming growth factor beta signaling pathway and the nerve growth factor signaling pathway . These genes and their products share different biophysical and functional properties. Some are growth factors acting as extracellular signals. Others are the corresponding ligand receptors. Other signaling proteins transmit the differentiation signal to the nucleus. There, transcription factors and other proteins regulate chromatin structure and gene expression. To model differentiation we use Boolean networks, which have been shown to produce multiple features of regulatory gene networks . Furthermore, Boolean networks can approximate well the continuous expression profiles of genes . We developed a theoretical algorithm to detect, using a random Boolean gene regulatory network, which genes and their products can participate in computer-simulated differentiationlike events . Here, we show that genes related to this in silico differentiation are associated with differentiation as documented in the literature. Multiple supervised machine learning algorithms have been proposed to classify genes into categories, using gene expression patterns or properties of the protein interaction network . Here, we propose a novel approach to define genes related to differentiation based on first principles and not on blind machine learning algorithms. The function of genes and proteins is typically studied using their sequence/structure, expression pattern and biochemical interactions. However, the function of genes may actually be induced by or at least correlated with the position of its protein in the genetic regulatory and proteinprotein interactions network. Here, we show that first principles on the expected dynamics of networks can help detecting genes correlated with differentiation. To whom correspondence should be addressed.We created Boolean networks consistent with the HN by choosing, randomly for each gene, a Boolean function consistent with the activators and repressors it has according to thenetwork. For each network, we checked whether a conversion between two random cycles could occur. The conversion is a model of differentiation-like events in random Boolean networks . We investigated these simulated differentiation-like events using a set of signaling nodes. Simply stated, a conversion in this context is the transfer of a Boolean network from one attractor to another following signaling from neighboring cells. To determine which genes (nodes in the network) are the most critical for the conversion, a multistep process was performed. First, genes that behave similarly in the two cycles were eliminated (see Section 2). Then we chose within these genes those that could induce a cycle conversion. Among those, we removed the genes residing in loops that do not affect the conversion as explained in Section 2. We computed how often each gene belongs to the resulting set of converting genes in these simulations. The result of this process is a list of genes ordered by the fraction of simulations where each gene is predicted to participate in signaling that induces cell conversion. This list is referred to as the GSL. If our assumption that conversion is related to the network structure and if our algorithm is correct, we expect the result of this purely theoretical argument to be correlated with the experimental observations of differentiations. To show that this is the case, we analyzed the order of the genes in the GSL. Among the genes at the top 5 of the GSL are IL4R (interleukin 4 receptor), Mitogen-activated protein/extracellular signal-regulated kinase 1 (MEK1), extracellular signal-regulated kinase 2 (ERK2), epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) and (nuclear factor kappa-light-chain-enhancer of activated B cells (NF-kB). These genes play key roles in known important differentiation processes. IL4R is a type I cytokine receptor, that by binding to interleukin 4 promotes the differentiation of T cells to Th2 cells . MEK1 and ERK2 are involved in several differentiation processes including neuronal differentiation . The EGFR is a cell surface receptor for members of the epidermal growth factor family. It is involved in many differentiation processes . NF-kB is a protein complex that controls the transcription of DNA. NFkB is known not only for activating B cells but also for osteogenic differentiation . The top 5 of the GSL is found in. The full GSL is given in Supplementary Section S8.The top ranking genes are not the only ones related to differentiation. Actually, a clear correlation between the order of genes in the list and the definitions of genes related to differentiation based on their GO classification can be found throughout the list. We compared the order of genes obtained from the algorithm with genes associated with differentiation using the GO annotation (see Section 2), using four statistical tests. According to the GO-based gene classification, 25 of the studied genes are associated with cellular differentiation. However, when scoring the genes according to the fraction of time they participate in differentiation in the theoretical model (which will be denoted the sorted list hitherto), 43 of the top 15 of the list are related to differentiation (P 0.0006) . The results are not sensitive to the cutoff, and a 10/20 cutoff led to P 0.006 and P 0.002, respectively. Similarly, throughout the entire list, genes associated with differentiation have higher scores (P 0.005 for the MannWhitney test and P 0.0011 for the gene rank test) (and). The P-values of these tests can be affected by correlation between neighboring genes in the network. We thus used an extra test, the enrichment test, which avoids such biases. We computed for each conversion the fraction of nodes with GO annotations related to differentiation out of the nodes in the sufficient RSCCsNote: The full list is given in Supplementary Section S8. We have used multiple methods to determine whether a gene is related to differentiation. The second column represents genes with published literature describing them as linked to differentiation (see column 5 for typical reference). The third column represents genes with a GO annotation related to differentiation and the fourth column represents genes related to differentiation using the Categorizer automatic GO hierarchy analyzer (http://www.animalgenome.org/tools/catego/). and compared it to the fraction of such nodes in the network. We observed a 26 enrichment in differentiation GO annotations in cycles with nodes inducing differentiation in the model (P51.e-30).The relation between a specific pathway and differentiation can be the result of the specific interactions in these pathways, and detailed molecular aspects of the component of this pathway, or this relation may be the result of the position of the pathway in a larger network. Although the two explanations are not contradictory, the first one has been classically highlighted. Here, we have used a novel approach to test the second hypothesis. We asked whether the properties of the gene regulatory network affect the genes and their products that are associated with cell differentiation.We have shown that our methodology that was developed as a theoretical model of random Boolean networks can provide an educated guideline for the detection of genes experimentally observed to participate in cell differentiation events in humans, although the algorithm was never trained on gene classification from experimental data. Using non-parametric statistics (rank test), we have demonstrated that the correlation between the genes that participated in the conversions of the simulations (using our algorithms) to those actually known to date to be involved in cellular differentiation in human cells is statistically significant. We further validated that these results are not exclusively affected by the existing correlation between the participation of genes in conversions and their degree; by using rewired networks as a control, we have shown that the effect of degree is limited. This confirms that the seemingly theoretical approach actually uncovers features in the gene regulatory network that are inherent to stem cell differentiation. We have also tested for a possibility that our results are simply induced by the centrality (which is highly correlated with both the degree and our score), but again the centrality is much less correlated with the GO classification than our score. We did find, however, that the signs of the edges are almost meaningless, implying that the observed sign of the regulation is too partial to lead to useful conclusions at least in the current context. The absence of a sign effect may be the result of a more inherent structure of the network. A basic concept in Boolean networks introduced by Kauffman is the core of the network . The networks core is the set of nodes found fixed on the same Boolean values in all of the networks cycles. Kauffman studied the emergence of the core and supplied sufficient mathematical theory for its formation. However, there is no good way to estimate a priori the dynamics of nodes not found in the core. In the conversions studied here, the nodes change their character between the two cycles and hence are not supposed to be a part of the core. However, we did find nodes in the sufficient RSCCs that according to Kauffman were supposed to be a part of the core. Moreover, in the sufficient RSCCs, we found nodes not fixed in both of the cycles although the conversions are not dependent on the initial steps of the cycles. Thus, the structural element shaping the dynamics of cycles in Boolean networks may extend well beyond the standard definition of the core. One aspect of this modeling may explain why sign-scrambling the edges does not drastically affect the sufficient RSCCs. This may happen, as changing the signs may compensate and preserve a similar core and perhaps even similar sufficient RSCCs. A detailed analysis of the structures beyond the network core will be given in a future work. The algorithm not only detects genes but also detects the edges between them (interaction between genes tightly linked to differentiation). We built a subgraph from the genes and edges that frequently participated in conversions. The only long pathway detected was found to be one of the most active pathways in differentiation processes of the adult human, affecting the differentiation of cells in the hematopoietic system. This long pathway is composed mainly of mid-degree genes showing again that the degree is not at all the main element driving the participation in conversions. To the best of our knowledge, this work is the first to predict genes that are related to differentiation based only on a gene regulatory network. The presented methodology can be. Largest CC of the emerged subgraph. The sufficient RSCCs contain not only genes but the edges between them as well. Each edge has a score reflecting the number of times it participated in the sufficient RSCCs. The emerged subgraph contains only genes and edges that participated frequently in conversions. Only one large CC (connect component) was found. In Supplementary Section S9, the genes of the largest CC are presented with a short description applied to create a novel bioinformatics tool for gene classification and can also assist experimental biologists that wish to induce differentiation to cells in vitro and in vivo. An important result from our previous theoretical work is that conversions are mostly reversible. Unlike the process of iPSCs (induced pluripotent stem cells), where fully differentiated cells become pluripotent by the ectopic expression of key transcription factors , we suggested that differentiated cells can be used as precursor cells to the tissue stem cells from which they originated by overexpressing relevant genes products. The presented methodology can be applied to assist experimental biologists that wish to attempt such a process. Boolean networks were initially developed to study theoretical concepts such as the number of possible attractors in a random network or their properties . Here, we have shown that these networks can have direct practical application for the classification of genes. This is the first time that such applications are presented for a concept that was considered purely theoretical. We have shown that by pure mathematical analysis of well-curated gene networks, we can predict the genes that are associated with differentiation. The algorithms that we have developed will become more and more useful as the gene networks will grow and expand in the future. 
