GeneTIER: prioritization of candidate disease genes using tissue-specific gene expression profiles Motivation: In attempts to determine the genetic causes of human disease, researchers are often faced with a large number of candidate genes. Linkage studies can point to a genomic region containing hundreds of genes, while the high-throughput sequencing approach will often identify a great number of non-synonymous genetic variants. Since systematic experimental verification of each such candidate gene is not feasible, a method is needed to decide which genes are worth investigating further. Computational gene prioritization presents itself as a solution to this problem, systematically analyzing and sorting each gene from the most to least likely to be the disease-causing gene, in a fraction of the time it would take a researcher to perform such queries manually. Results: Here, we present Gene TIssue Expression Ranker (GeneTIER), a new web-based application for candidate gene prioritization. GeneTIER replaces knowledge-based inference traditionally used in candidate disease gene prioritization applications with experimental data from tissue-specific gene expression datasets and thus largely overcomes the bias toward the better characterized genes/diseases that commonly afflict other methods. We show that our approach is capable of accurate candidate gene prioritization and illustrate its strengths and weaknesses using case study examples. Availability and Implementation: Freely available on the web atCurrent high-throughput sequencing methods used for disease gene discovery can generate very large volumes of data. While the extraction of non-synonymous, potentially deleterious variants can be easily automated, this often results in the identification of thousands of candidate disease genes. Since the experimental verification of an individual gene can be both difficult and time consuming, some method to prioritize the order in which such verification is sought is often employed. A common approach is to examine biological databases and literature for information pertaining to each candidate disease gene, in order to select the most promising genes. This can be both slow and error-prone, as the data are spread across multiple resources with no common structure. Nor can this type of analysis be quantified, since the selection is based solely on the subjective impressions of the researcher.The algorithm used by GeneTIER assumes that a disease genes expression tends to be significantly higher in affected tissues compared with unaffected tissue. To test the generality of this assumption, we retrieved expression values from our database for all genes in our training set (see Section 2) and performed a two-sample KolmogorovSmirnov test for non-normally distributed data, using an alternative hypothesis that the cumulative frequency distribution function of modified scores from unaffected tissues lies below that of modified scores from diseaseassociated tissues. For RNA-sequencing data this resulted in statistic D 0.1517, with respective P-value 2.2e 16 and for microarray data D 0.1334, P-value 2.2e 16. The performance of GeneTIER was assessed on a dataset comprised of 1000 known associations between disease genes and tissues expected to be affected by each genes dysfunction. For each disease gene, four sets of random genes were generated, comprising 50, 100, 200 and 500 genes. The disease genes were prioritized against the genes in the randomly generated gene sets and the results analyzed using ROC analysis. ROC curves provide a way to visualize and compare classifier performance. Here, the candidate gene prioritization algorithm can be viewed as a non-binary scoring classifier, where disease-linked genes are positive instances and other candidates are negatives. The valuesor ranksfrom the classifier output can be converted into binary positive and negative scores using cut-off thresholds. Thus, a confusion matrix can be calculated for every integer rank cut-off value from which comparison metrics, such as sensitivity and specificity values are derived. ROC graphs allow the visualization of sensitivity versus 1-specificity. The line running from the origin (0,0) to the maximum point of 1,1 (Y X), which corresponds to an area under the curve (AUC) of 0.5, represents a performance that is no better than random predictions. Points on a ROC curve that occur above this line represent an algorithm with better than random classifier performance, while those below the line have worse than random results, i.e. a bias toward classifying positives as negatives. An algorithm with an AUC of 1 represents perfect classifier performance.shows the resultant ROC graphs whileshows the corresponding AUC scores. This analysis suggests that the algorithms performance was inversely related to the number of nondisease genes in the analysis, but does not decline in a linear manner. In fact, the differences in performance when assessed on candidate lists consisting of 100, 200 or 500 candidates are minor and do not suggest that the maximum candidate gene list size will be encountered in typical gene mapping experiments. Overall, the obtained AUC values are sufficiently high to suggest that disease genes are typically ranked higher than the randomly selected genes in each data set by this algorithm. In order to illustrate the circumstances where our methodology either failed or succeeded, we used a case study of the global expression patterns for genes implicated in retinitis pigmentosa (OMIM:610282), a degenerative eye disease causing severe vision impairment.shows the expression profiles across multiple normal tissues of five disease genes known to underlie retinitis pigmentosa, while Tables 2 and 3 show the summary of the mean ranks obtained using our method. The genes PRPF3 and PRPF31 show distinct, tissue-specific expression in eye tissues with negligible expression in non-ocular tissue; disease genes with similar expression profiles are ranked very highly by our methodology. While PRPF6 is also highly expressed in eye tissues, unlike PRPF3 and PRPF31 its expression is not limited to ocular tissues, resulting in a reduced, but still strongly suggestive ranking. ROM1 is expressed in a number of non-ocular tissues as well as in corneal epithelial cells but still ranked highly. This was in spite of its lower expression in corneal epithelial cells than that of the PRPF genes and comparable expression in adipose tissue. Unsurprisingly, in view of its ubiquitously low expression levels, the methodology failed to identify PR1. In order to ascertain whether our method is more appropriate for certain disease types, we analyzed how well GeneTiER performs across a range of tissues. Supplementaryhighlights that GeneTiER can accurately prioritize genes across most tissue categories, recognizing endocrine and integumentary system-specific genesTissue-specific gene expression profilesparticularly well, with 73 and 76 of disease genes, respectively, ranked in the top 10. However, genes in the sensory category, comprising mostly eye-related disorders, ranked poorly. The eye is a complex organ with many specialized tissue types. While the GeneTiER database contains expression data from corneal epithelial cells, stromal cells and murine lens, these do not encompass all the diverse cell types present in the eye. Consequently, diseases of the eye that do not affect these tissues will not be correctly prioritized by our approach. Conversely, diseases affecting vision can be neurodegenerative in nature, in which case the causativegene may not have a function in the eye.Finally, we have considered which data typeRNA-Seq or microarrayenabled more accurate prioritization results. We considered all diseases where both RNASeq and microarray data were available for all the identified affected tissue types. Supplementaryshows the ROC curves obtained when the dataset was prioritized together with 100 random genes. The difference in performance between RNA-Seq and microarray data is minimal, with RNA-sequencing data giving better results (ROC 0.80 versus 0.78), but slightly worse than the combined score approach (ROC 0.81).This is in concordance with a recent study by, who found that while more differentially expressed genes identified by RNA-sequencing than microarray studies could be verified by qPCR, the gain was mostly from the improved quantification of low abundance transcripts. Furthermore, while sequencing data do provide a small improvement over microarray data in prioritization, this is offset by a more limited public availability of sequencing datasets. There are currently 41124 microarray datasets deposited in Array Express database in contrast to only 5745 RNA-sequencing experiments (accessed 01/03/2014).While a number of methods have been previously employed for the prioritization of candidate disease genes, none are universally applicable. These methods tend to rely heavily on prior knowledge about the disease, phenotype and/or genes, making them unsuitable systems for classifying novel and/or poorly characterized genes. The best performing methods have been shown to rely on a variety of information sources to compensate for inadequacies in knowledge in any single domain. However, there is value to be found in approaches which distance themselves entirely from the guilt-byassociation principle used by these methods, which have an inherent bias toward well characterized genes. The wide range of open access gene expression data can serve to overcome the limitations of prior knowledge-based approaches by substituting gene-or disease-specific information with tissue-specific experimental data. However, implementations of this approach often exhibit certain limitations. Some implementations prioritize candidate disease genes based on co-expression with genes already known to be associated with the disease in question. This requires the user to supply seed genes, thus making the assumption that preexisting knowledge about the disease is either available or relevant to the particular disease phenotype. This may not be the case; for example, OMIM currently contains several thousand disease entries for which no contributing genes are yet known. Conversely, a number of network-based methods prioritize genes under the assumption that a disease gene will exist in a local network of genes which are highly differentially expressed between affected and unaffected tissues. However, while this type of approach can be successful in disease-specific studies, it is difficult to generalize for wider use, due to its reliance on differential expression datasets between disease and control tissue samples. Some implementations overcome these difficulties by requesting the user to supply their own data. However, this can be seen as a contradiction to the major aim of computational candidate prioritization which is to reduce the experimental burden on a researcher, rather than requiring the user to perform further studies. In this study, we present a novel application for candidate disease gene prioritization that aims to address the shortcomings discussed above. GeneTiER does not require the user to have any prior knowledge of the disease, other than the ability to unambiguously identify affected tissues. The application has been specifically designed to require only minimal user input, and takes care of conversions between a variety of commonly used gene identifiers and between human/mouse orthologs. We have taken advantage of both microarray expression and RNA sequencing data available in the public domain to create an extensive tissue-specific expression database that can support a wide variety of gene prioritization queries. Organs are made up of many functionally diverse tissue cell types and this can be reflected in the experimental data. Therefore, we have striven to collate data from multiple, distinctive datasets, to enable the user to make tissue cell type-specific queries which are not supported by many of the popular databases. Many popular gene prioritization methods that rely on prior knowledge about a disease use either text-mining approaches or Gene Ontology annotations to score candidates based on relevance to query. Currently, there are still over a thousand human genes with no available GO annotations and many more with shallow annotations. While this presents a problem for disease gene inference by similarity, the method described here would not be any less applicable. For example, at the time of writing, no Gene Ontology annotations have yet been ascribed to the human CDR1 gene, known to contribute to paraneoplastic cerebellar degeneration(OMIM:302650). This gene shows localized expression in brain tissues, in particular in the cerebellum, and as such is scored highly by our method, whereas approaches reliant on prior knowledge are likely to fail. However, direct performance comparisons between gene prioritization tools are difficultwithout cross-validation, any prioritization on known disease genes is meaningless, and to the best of our knowledge, no web gene prioritization application provides a performance assessment mode. While we have shown that GeneTiER is capable of accurate disease gene prioritization through ROC analysis (with AUC values of up to 0.83), it should be noted that the disease gene is rarely ranked first in the output. This ranking should therefore be used as a guide to the order in which candidate genes should be analyzed further. Even so, it must be noted that not all disease gene expression patterns conform to the assumptions underlying our model. For example, some disease genes show universally high or low gene expression across all tissues (see RP1 in). Indeed, aberrant activation of genes which are normally repressed can result in a disease phenotype, as is the case in many cancers. However, in order to detect these patterns, the differential expression change must be observed between the normal and affected states. While including differential expression data from normal and affected patients would no doubt improve GeneTiER performance, public availability of such data is mostly limited to a small number of well-studied diseases and therefore would enhance the results for only a small proportion of cases. Furthermore, as Oellrich and Smedley (2014) note in their analysis, the site of gene expression and the visible phenotype do not always coincide. Consequently, the limitations of this method must be understood and taken into consideration when examining the final gene rankings. This is especially true where the link between tissue and phenotype may not be immediately obvious. For example, congenital dysfibrinogenemia (OMIM:616004) is a blood clotting disorder caused by defective fibrinogen genes FGB, FGG and FGA. Circulating factors affecting blood clotting are synthesized by hepatocytes, and indeed, our data show that fibrinogen genes are highly and exclusively expressed in the liver (Supplementary). However, GeneTiER would not identity these disease genes if the user failed to take this into account and selected blood, rather than liver, as the affected tissue. Narcolepsy-cataplexy (ORPHANET:2073) is a sleep disorder with multiple causative genes identified. GeneTiER scores a number of these highly, for example MOG and ZNF365, due to localized expression in parts of the brain (Supplementary). However, the disease can have an autoimmune component and in some patients the phenotype has been attributed to the loss of neurons in the hypothalamus due to autoimmune attacks. Consequently, our methodology fails to identify histocompatibility genes HLA-DQB1 and HLA-DRB1 as causative genes for the disease and may find other phenotypes arising from heterogeneous causes challenging (Supplementary). Similarly, GeneTiER will not be able to identify disease genes that are expressed exclusively in tissues not present in our dataset. Similarly, diseases caused by genes that are expressed in response to either an environmental stimulus or within a short development time frame will not perform well if the appropriately stimulated tissue is absent from our dataset. In spite of these challenges, there are numerous cases where the observed phenotype correlates with the site of expression exceedingly well. For example, renal tubular dysgenesis (OMIM:267430) is characterized by a congenital abnormality of the kidneys, with low amniotic fluid during pregnancy. The protein associated with the disease, REN, is produced mostly by juxtaglomerular cells of the kidney. The data in GeneTiER database agree with this, showing elevated expression in the kidney, as well as a secondary major site of expression in the placenta (Supplementary). Our testing indicates that our gene prioritization method is capable of meaningful candidate gene prioritization and performs strongly in a substantial proportion of cases tested. GeneTiER aims to highlight genes with tissue-specific expression patterns to the user from among other candidate genes in their dataset, and as such will perform best for diseases with distinct, localized phenotypes. Nevertheless, a broad selection of tissues allows for scoring of complex phenotypes affecting any combination of tissues. We believe GeneTiER offers great utility value to the research community and can effectively supplement the in silico toolbox of any researcher. 
