GenoExp: a web tool for predicting gene expression levels from single nucleotide polymorphisms Understanding the effect of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) on the expression level of genes is an important goal. We recently published a study in which we devised a multi-SNP predictive model for gene expression in Lymphoblastoid cell lines (LCL), and showed that it can robustly predict the expression of a small number of genes in test individuals. Here, we validate the generality of our models by predicting expression profiles for genes in LCL in an independent study, and extend the pool of predictable genes for which we are able to explain more than 25 of their expression variability to 232 genes across 14 different cell types. As the number of people who obtained their SNP profiles through companies such as 23andMe is rising rapidly, we developed GenoExp, a web-based tool in which users can upload their individual SNP data and obtain predicted expression levels for the set of predictable genes across the 14 different cell types. Our tool thus allows users with biological knowledge to study the possible effects that their set of SNPs might have on these genes and predict their cell-specific expression levels relative to the population average.In recent years, individual genotype [i.e. single nucleotide polymorphisms (] data have become readily accessible via directto-consumer genetic testing (DTCGT) companies such as 23andMe, deCODEme and Navigenics. These companies allow users to acquire their allele calls at 0.5 M SNPs across the genome, as well as a report of higher and lower risk for certain diseases, based on their genotyped SNPs. Since we have recently developed methods to robustly predict gene expression solely from genotype , we decided to enable users to predict their own gene expression across multiple cell types. To this end, we developed GenoExp, a web-based tool where users can upload their raw genotype files obtained from any DTCGT company, and view their predicted gene expression (for a set of predictable genes) across 14 different cell types. To demonstrate the application of GenoExp, we used 23andMe genotype data provided willingly by one individual. We show the resulting predictions of gene expression and highlight examples such as a gene known to play a role in learning and memory that is predicted to be expressed above population-mean in brain cells of that individual.Our recently published method was developed using genotype and gene expression data taken from Lymphoblastoid cell lines (LCLs) of 715 individuals. Therefore, we wished to test whether we could apply it to other tissues or cell types as well. For this purpose, we obtained two additional independent datasets that contained both genotype and gene expression measurements for different individuals: Genotype-Tissue Expression . Next, we ran our predictive pipeline separately for the data in each of the 14 cell types (Supplementary Figs. S1S4). Specifically, for each cell type we used a strict 5-fold cross-validation scheme to learn a predictive model for the expression of each gene from the genotype of its cis-SNPs across individuals, and evaluated the performance of our models on held-out test individuals from the same gene and cell type. We found that across all cell types, a total of 232 unique genes exceeded an R 2 of 0.25 on test data (i.e. more than 25 of expression variability is explained on held-out individuals) in at least one of the cell types. These genes were therefore defined as predictable genes (Supplementary). Next, to test the generality of our models, we further obtained additional genotype data coupled with gene expression measurements of 381 twin-pairs (i.e. a total of 762 individuals) from the Multiple Tissue Human Expression Resource (MuTHER;). When applying the models learned from LCLs to the MuTHER data, we found that in 79 of cases, we predicted the correct direction of over-or under-expression (see Supplementary text for extended details), strengthening the validity of our predictions. Finally, we wanted to allow users to predict their own gene expression across multiple cell types using our predictive models. To this end, we developed GenoExp, a web-based tool where users can upload their raw genotype files obtained from any DTCGT company (e.g. 23andMe), and view their predicted gene expression (for the predictable genes) across the different 14 cell types (Supplementary). To demonstrate the application of GenoExp, we used 23andME genotype data willingly provided by one individual (Supplementary). We found that for this individual, some genes are predicted as expressed above populationmean in all cell types where prediction is possible (e.g. HLA-DRB5, SNPs used for prediction in skin shown in Supplementary), whereas other genes are predicted as expressed below populationmean (e.g. KCTD10). Clearly, this over-and under-expression does not necessarily imply functional consequences, yet they could be suggestive. For example, the gene CHURC1, which was predicted to be expressed above population-mean in all 4 cell types in the brain, has a homolog that was shown to play a key role in the development of neurons , and a deletion of the genomic region containing it has been linked to autism . In addition, the AMFR gene that was shown to be involved in the process of learning and memory in the central nervous system of mice was also predicted to be expressed above population-mean in the brain cells of the tested individual. of cis-SNPs as covariates in the prediction problem, and learned the predictive model as described in Manor and Segal (2013). However, due to the fact that the K-Nearest-Neighbor model is both memory and computationally intensive, in the web-tool we restricted ourselves to the regularized linear version of the model (Supplementary). 
