Genome-wide histone acetylation data improve prediction of mammalian transcription factor binding sites Motivation: Histone acetylation (HAc) is associated with open chromatin, and HAc has been shown to facilitate transcription factor (TF) binding in mammalian cells. In the innate immune system context, epigenetic studies strongly implicate HAc in the transcriptional response of activated macrophages. We hypothesized that using data from large-scale sequencing of a HAc chromatin immunoprecipitation assay (ChIP-Seq) would improve the performance of computational prediction of binding locations of TFs mediating the response to a signaling event, namely, macrophage activation. Results: We tested this hypothesis using a multi-evidence approach for predicting binding sites. As a training/test dataset, we used ChIP-Seq-derived TF binding site locations for five TFs in activated murine macrophages. Our model combined TF binding site motif scanning with evidence from sequence-based sources and from HAc ChIP-Seq data, using a weighted sum of thresholded scores. We find that using HAc data significantly improves the performance of motif-based TF binding site prediction. Furthermore, we find that within regions of high HAc, local minima of the HAc ChIP-Seq signal are particularly strongly correlated with TF binding locations. Our model, using motif scanning and HAc local minima, improves the sensitivity for TF binding site prediction by 50 over a model based on motif scanning alone, at a false positive rate cutoff of 0.01. Availability: The data and software source code for model training and validation are freely available online atMammalian cells exhibit diverse transcriptional profiles across different cell types and conditions, for example, in immune cells activated with different pathogen-associated molecules . To a large extent, these profiles are controlled by the arrangement and chromatin accessibility of cis-regulatory To whom correspondence should be addressed. elements . Transcription factors (TFs) bind specific sequence elements in chromatin locations of permissive epigenetic or conformational states, leading to activation or repression of transcriptional activity. For mapping these regulatory interactions, it is particularly promising that the binding of a TF can now be measured genome wide using chromatin immunoprecipitation (IP) with sequence detection . However, antibody and cellular material requirements preclude using ChIP-Seq to screen for all TFs mediating a transcriptional response. There remains a need for computational approaches that can, in the absence of experimental TF binding data, leverage transcriptional data and genomic information to identify the network of TFs and binding sites that underlies a transcriptional response. An important tool for predicting mammalian TF binding sites is motif scanning, i.e. searching DNA sequence for matches within a library of sequence motifs reported to be bound by specific TFs . Such a library enables mapping between a scanning-identified sequence element and one or more candidate TFs that may bind it. However, such motifs are often highly uncertain and they can be degenerate, leading to a high frequency of false positive predictions . Furthermore, mammalian cis-regulatory elements can be tens of kilobases from transcription start sites, necessitating searching large sequence regions and further increasing false positives. These issues undermine the performance of motif scanning as a standalone approach. Successful motifbased prediction of TF binding depends on identifying the sequence regions, within the relevant cell type, that are likely to contain cisregulatory elements . It has been observed that cis-regulatory elements tend to cooccur with chromatin or sequence features that can be grouped in three categories: (i) chromatin structural features such as DNase I hypersensitive sites; (ii) epigenetic marks such as histone acetylation (HAc); and (iii) sequence features such as high GC content and conservation across species. The HAc mark, which has been associated with active promoters and open chromatin , is of particular relevance to transcriptional regulation because the modification can be placed or removed in response to the cellular state. These observations have spurred the development of approaches that integrate data for multiple types of chromatin features to improve the accuracy of TF binding site predictions. Various data integration frameworks for binding site prediction have been used, including the support vector machine , probabilistic methodsand its upstream regulatory region, with TF binding data and various feature tracks. Measured binding locations for the TF NFB/p50 are shown in orange (top row). Each feature track is displayed in colored vertical bars interspersed every 100 bp: HAc ChIP-Seq signal (magenta); valley scores (VS) for HAc local minima (blue); normalized NFB binding site motif match scores (red); DNA sequence GC content (green); nucleosome occupancy score (green); and vertebrate conservation score for genomic sequence (green). The NFB binding sites correspond to local minima in the HAc ChIP-Seq signal. Inset: Within a local minimum of the ChIP-Seq signal (magenta curve), the smaller of the maximum signal values on either side of the local minimum is computed, and the entire local minimum region is assigned that value as its VS, and the value zero outside the local minimum region (blue lines) (Supplementary Section S1.6). (B) The distribution of HAc ChIP VS from stimulated cells in TF-bound sites differs substantially from non-TF-bound sites, as shown in the two histograms (note the logarithmic vertical scale).Feature distributions: first, the TF specificity of the motif scanning was investigated. Across all five TFs, the motif scanning score distribution from TFBSs was significantly higher than the distribution from non-binding sites (Supplementary). Next, HAc VS representing local minima were computed, and the distributions of VS at TFBSs and non-binding sites were compared. In LPS-stimulated cells, HAc VS were significantly higher at TFBSs than at non-binding sites ; this motivated the use of HAc ChIP data to improve predictions. Furthermore, LPS-dependent TFBSs were correlated with LPS-inducible HAc local minima (Supplementary Table S4 and). Model performance: first, two-feature models (motifs plus one other feature) were compared with a motifs-only reference model. Based on the area under the sensitivity versus FPR curve (, Supplementaryand), the model with HAc VS fromPrediction performance (area under the sensitivity versus FPR curve, or ROC curve) for models with motif scanning and one additional feature, and a motifs-only reference model (data for models with three features are shown in Supplementary). Larger bar values correspond to better cross-validation-average performance on the test dataset. The performance for the reference model is shown in the blue bar (and vertical dotted line), and a random model is shown as a negative control (black bar). The motifs-only model outperformed the random model, 27-fold. Each green bar represents a model that used motif information plus a specific sequence-based feature (GC content, etc.). Each cyan bar represents a model that used motif information plus a HAc ChIP-Seq-based feature (Supplementaryfor the complete FPR range). The model with HAc VS (from stimulated cells; gray curve) outperforms the other models. ROC curves were obtained by varying the prediction score cutoff (Section 3). The lack of improvement for the nucleosome occupancy-based model is consistent with the very weak association between this feature and TF binding (Supplementary). stimulated cells had the highest performance improvement relative to the reference model (52 increase, P 10 3 ). The HAc ChIPSeq signal also improved prediction performance (by 14), but the improvement was highly variable from TF to TF (coefficient of variation = 27; see Supplementary). The model using the stimulated-cell HAc VS also outperformed the unstimulatedcell HAc VS data (by 31, P 0.01). In contrast to the HAc ChIP-derived datasets, the three genomic features (GC content, conservation and nucleosome occupancy score) did not substantially improve prediction performance. However, the improvements due to GC content (5 increase) and conservation (3) were more consistent from TF to TF, and thus in both cases were statistically significant (P 0.05). Next, models with motifs plus two other features were compared with the best previous model (motifs + HAc VS). None of the models gave a statistically significant improvement over the best two-feature model (Supplementary). These findings suggest that more TF binding data would be required to discriminate prediction performances of three-feature models. 
