Genome analysis GenPlay Multi-Genome, a tool to compare and analyze multiple human genomes in a graphical interface Parallel visualization of multiple individual human genomes is a complex endeavor that is rapidly gaining importance with the increasing number of personal, phased and cancer genomes that are being generated. It requires the display of variants such as SNPs, indels and structural variants that are unique to specific genomes and the introduction of multiple overlapping gaps in the reference sequence. Here, we describe GenPlay Multi-Genome, an application specifically written to visualize and analyze multiple human genomes in parallel. GenPlay Multi-Genome is ideally suited for the comparison of allele-specific expression and functional gen-omic data obtained from multiple phased genomes in a graphical interface with access to multiple-track operation. It also allows the analysis of data that have been aligned to custom genomes rather than to a standard reference and can be used as a variant calling format file browser and as a tool to compare different genome assembly , such as hg19 and hg38.Allele-specific analyses, which are much more powerful when they are performed on phased genomes, can shed light onto myriad questions related to genotype/phenotype correlations, parental imprinting, X chromosome inactivation, DNA methylation, DNA replication and chromatin structure. Most genomes produced to date are unphased, but technology is now available to reliably generate phased genomes . One current difficulty in performing allele-specific analysis is the lack of software to visualize and compare expression, epigenetic and other functional genomics data obtained from multiple phased genomes. Visualization of such data is difficult because of the presence of large number of indels and structural variants in humans. GenPlay Multi-Genome, a major update to GenPlay, was developed to help resolve some of these problems. GenPlay is a multi-platform active genome browser and analyzer written in Java. As other browsers , GenPlay can display RNA-seq, ChIP-seq, Methyl-seq or TimEX-seq and a variety of DNA sequence and annotation tracks. In addition, GenPlay is unique because it can rapidly transform any loaded data using 4100 pre-programmed operations .Once the meta-reference genome is computed, GenPlay can display the genetic variants present in all of the loaded genomes. Insertions that are present in only some of the genomes are replaced by synchronization blocks (and Supplementary). Inversions are displayed as the sum of a deletion plus an insertion. Filters are available to select variants according to any of the fields present in the VCF file (genotype, phasing, allele depth, quality value, genotype probability, etc.). Filters can be combined to create complex filters. In multi-genome mode, GenPlay becomes a powerful VCF file browser that can be used to visualize the structure of multiple genomes in a graphical interface. GenPlay also allows users to visualize, analyze and To whom correspondence should be addressed. 
