Genome analysis GMD: measuring the distance between histograms with applications on high-throughput sequencing reads GMD (generalized minimum distance of distributions) is an R package to assess the similarity between spatial distributions of read-based sequencing data such as ChIP-seq and RNA-seq. GMD calculates the optimal distance between pairs of normalized signal distributions, optionally sliding one distribution over the other to align the distributions. GMD also provides graphical and downstream clustering tools. Availability: The R package GMD source code is available at http:// cran.r-project.org/web/packages/GMD/ under GPL license Contact:High-throughput DNA sequencers are now a cornerstone in genomics and can be used for inferring expression, splicing and non-coding isoforms (RNA-seq), transcription start sites (TSSs) (CAGE), transcription factor binding sites, chromatin status (ChIPseq) and more. Aside from typical tasks of read mapping/aligning to a reference or de novo assembling, differential expression, counting and peak calling, variant and mutation calling, comparing the distributions of DNA reads between different genomic loci or between different biological features (e.g. histone modifications) is also often meaningful. This is because the spatial distributions of such reads often indicate biological features; for example, ChIPseq experiments targeting H3K4me3 histone modifications often aggregate in characteristic double peaks around TSSs, while the H3K36me3 mark increase from TSS to termination site . Similar examples exist for TSS and small RNA data . To do this systematically, a measure of similarity between distributions is necessary. Such measures should ideally be true metrics, have as few parameters as possible, be computationally efficient and also make biological sense to end-users. Here, we present such a measure, generalized minimum distance of distributions (GMD), based on MDPA (minimum difference of pair assignment,). It can compare two empirical distributions of categorical data, which we refer as histograms (Supplementary Material). Considering two normalized histograms To whom correspondence should be addressed.Here, we show two examples of comparing distributions of CAGE and ChIP-seq data around TSSs, and an example of multiple pairwise comparison and the cluster utilities in GMD.The GMD metric differs from common distance measurements (e.g. Euclidean norm, KL divergence) since the bins in the histogram will not be treated as independent and the similarity between non-overlapping bins is taken into account (discussed in) and partial alignment is allowed. This makes sense in many applications when we have little knowledge about bin-to-bin correspondence between distributions. The GMD package together with its vignette and manual makes systematic studies comparing distributions possible with limited R knowledge. 
