Structural bioinformatics GPU linear and non-linear Poisson–Boltzmann solver module for DelPhi In this work, we present a CUDA-based GPU implementation of a PoissonBoltzmann equation solver, in both the linear and non-linear versions, using double precision. A finite difference scheme is adopted and made suitable for the GPU architecture. The resulting code was interfaced with the electrostatics software for biomolecules DelPhi, which is widely used in the computational biology community. The algorithm has been implemented using CUDA and tested over a few representative cases of biological interest. Details of the implementation and performance test results are illustrated. A speedup of $10 times was achieved both in the linear and non-linear cases. Availability and implementation: The module is open-source and available atThe PoissonBoltzmann equation (PBE) is a widely used tool to estimate the electrostatic energy of molecular systems in ionic solution. Given the continuously increasing size of structural data for proteins and other macromolecules and the need to deal with bigger and more complex structures, the availability of tested and reliable algorithms on the most recent and affordable computational architectures, such as Graphical Processing Units (GPUs), is highly desirable. In this context, we present an implementation on a GPU architecture of both a linear and a non-linear PBE solvers based on the finite difference (FD) scheme. The first use of an FD approach to solve the PBE can be ascribed to. Our implementation follows that adopted by the DelPhi solver and described in, which exploits the checkerboard structure of the FD discretization of the Laplace differential operator and adopts successive over relaxation to converge to the solution. To our knowledge, this is the first description of a GPU implementation of the non-linear PBE, which follows the same approach used by DelPhi and detailed in. Our implementation can be executed on any NVIDIA card with Compute Unified Device Architecture (CUDA) capabilities.The results inshow the speedup between the serial code executed on a CPU with an AMD Opteron (1.4 GHz) chip and a Tesla Kepler K20m. The solver was run on the fatty acid amide hydrolase protein with 8325 atoms. A monovalent salt concentration of 0.15 M was used. The relative dielectric constant of the molecule was taken as 2.0 and that of the solution as 80.0. The Debye length is roughly 8 A . The speedup of the non-linear algorithm is comparable with that of the linear one. In fact, the former benefits from a larger number of floating point operations but it suffers from a larger number of data transfers. 
