Alignment-free local structural search by writhe decomposition Motivation: Rapid methods for protein structure search enable biological discoveries based on flexibly defined structural similarity, unleashing the power of the ever greater number of solved protein structures. Projection methods show promise for the development of fast structural database search solutions. Projection methods map a structure to a point in a high-dimensional space and compare two structures by measuring distance between their projected points. These methods offer a tremendous increase in speed over residue-level structural alignment methods. However, current projection methods are not practical, partly because they are unable to identify local similarities. Results: We propose a new projection-based approach that can rapidly detect global as well as local structural similarities. Local structural search is enabled by a topology-inspired writhe decomposition protocol that produces a small number of fragments while ensuring that similar structures are cut in a similar manner. In benchmark tests, we show that our method, writher, improves accuracy over existing projection methods in terms of recognizing scop domains out of multi-domain proteins, while maintaining accuracy comparable with existing projection methods in a standard single-domain benchmark test. Availability: The source code is available at the following website:In the era of structural genomics, comparing a large number of structures can be a dauntingly time-consuming task. Therefore, a number of databases store precomputed structural similarities to accelerate structural comparison queries . However, such approaches have several limitations. First, these databases are not always updated in a timely fashion due to the sheer burden of computational requirements. Even if one applies a program that can compare two structures in 1 s, it would take more than 1 year to perform all-versus-all comparisons of 7897 proteins from the 40 non-redundant protein set of Astral 1.71 , which is only a subset of over 50 000 solved protein structures in the PDB . The second drawback of existing structural similarity databases is that they offer a rigid classification of structural relationships according to some predefined set of parameters. This precludes production of alternate classifications, such as building phylogenies for a particular subset of proteins while applying different scoring functions. In addition, analysis of a large number of artificial structures, such as clustering of models generated by structure prediction efforts, demands ultrafast structure comparison. Therefore, there is an increasingly compelling need for tools that can rapidly compare a large set of structures. Similarity of protein structures is typically measured via structural alignment, whose goal is to find a three-dimensional (3D) transformation that brings into correspondence the largest number of atoms between two structures. The quality of a 3D superposition is often measured by the number of matched C atoms and the distances between the matched atoms. The exact solution for the pairwise structural alignment is computationally expensive . Therefore, heuristic approaches have been developed to find good solutions with remarkable efficiency (for a review see,). Even so, typical superpositionbased heuristic programs are still too slow for many purposes: they take hours to perform a one-versus-all structural query. For example, running combinatorical extension (CE;) for one protein structure against 2930 non-redundant structures would take about 1 h on a modern desktop computer and thus several CPU-months to complete an all-versus-all comparison. A major speed increase for structural comparison was achieved by considering schemes of reduced representation of protein structures, instead of their full 3D coordinates of atoms. The most popular scheme for reduced structure representation is the secondary structure element (SSE), and a number of structure matching methods based on SSEs have been developed since the 1990s . Since the 1980s, ideas from differential geometry and topology have been explored to encode 3D structures into 1D representations . Like a comparison of protein amino acid sequences, a 1D representation allows much faster structure comparison than a full 3D alignment. More recently, several groups developed alternative 1D methods using innovative shape descriptors, such as discrete torsion angles , turning angles between smoothed backbone segments withBefore describing our assessment protocol, we discuss a common bias in existing benchmark tests. Existing benchmark tests typically use representative scop or cath domains. However, scop or cath domains are not generally typical protein structures a user may encounter: scop or cath domains are normally cut from whole PDB structures by experts of structure classification and automated tools. For a new protein to be compared against existing ones, delineating its domain boundaries is a non-trivial task for its own right . Therefore, we use two benchmark tests for evaluating our method. In the first experiment, we follow the common benchmark scenario and use single domains from a representative set of scop proteins. We use this test to verify that our methods performance is comparable with existing projection methods and also to provide an assessment consistent with those used previously. The second experiment adopts a more realistic setting, where multi-domain proteins are queried against a scop representative set of single-domain protein structures. Projection and SSE-based methods are aimed to be used as quick filters for more elaborated, but slower, similarity search methods. A good example is 3D-lookup method used as a filter in DaliLite program. A filter method should quickly compute a short list, e.g. about 100, of potentially similar structures. Some protein superfamilies (or families) may contain a large number of structures. Therefore, returning all similar structures from one superfamily may result in too many matches if the number of total matches is capped: some high-scoring and truly similar superfamilies might be excluded from the filter if they are simply less similar than the highest scoring superfamily. This problem becomes especially acute when a query is a multi-domain protein and we search for all domain representatives. Therefore, we suggest to use a scheme where instead of returning all similar structures, only superfamily representatives that received the highest score are returned. In other words, a result list of a filter method does not contain two structures from the same superfamily. In this way we keep results list short and it covers the largest number of structural superfamilies. This scheme was used to evaluate all filter methods below. Writher is compared against the following projection methods and leading non-projection filter programs.(1) SGM : a projection method based on GI comparison, employing the same procedure used in the basic stage of writher where two segments are compared. The GI vectors are generated using the program GI.c and the vector comparison is carried out by an inhouse Perl implementation.(2) SSEF : a leading projection method. The SSE footprint vectors are computed by a downloadable program and the vector comparison is carried out by an inhouse Perl implementation.(3) SSEA : the filter for Vorolign . SSEA treats a structure as a string of SSEs and aligns a pair of structures by the standard dynamic programming algorithm on this SSE string. As the raw alignment score gave unsatisfactory results, we normalized it as follows:, where q and p are query and target proteins, and S raw (p,q) is the raw score from SSEA method. The algorithm is evaluated using an inhouse C++ implementation. SSEA is not a projection method.(4) 3D-lookup algorithm : the filter for DaliLite . The database search is carried out by the wolf program in the DaliLite package. 
