GRiP: a computational tool to simulate transcription factor binding in prokaryotes Motivation: Transcription factors (TFs) are proteins that regulate gene activity by binding to specific sites on the DNA. Understanding the way these molecules locate their target site is of great importance in understanding gene regulation. We developed a comprehensive computational model of this process and estimated the model parameters in (N.R.Zabet and B.Adryan, submitted for publication). Results: GRiP (gene regulation in prokaryotes) is a highly versatile implementation of this model and simulates the search process in a computationally efficient way. This program aims to provide researchers in the field with a flexible and highly customizable simulation framework. Its features include representation of DNA sequence, TFs and the interaction between TFs and the DNA (facilitated diffusion mechanism), or between various TFs (cooperative behaviour). The software will record both information on the dynamics associated with the search process (locations of molecules) and also steady-state results (affinity landscape, occupancy-bias and collision hotspots). Availability: http://logic.It is well established now that transcription factor (TF) find their target site through facilitated diffusion, a combination between 1D random walk on the DNA and 3D diffusion in the cytoplasm . Once bound to the DNA, TFs perform three main types of movements: (i) sliding , (ii) hopping and (iii) jumping . The first two mechanisms, sliding and hopping, assume that the TF performs small movements on the DNA without releasing into the cytoplasm, whereas the third assumes a 3D diffusion in the cytoplasm before rebinding. With few exceptions, most of the theoretical efforts have been invested into analytical solutions of the facilitated diffusion mechanism. If one wants to consider real DNA sequences and dynamic crowding on the DNA (mobile roadblocks), then this rules out analytical solutions. Computational methods and, in particular, stochastic simulations overcome these limitations and To whom correspondence should be addressed.provide a more accurate mechanistic representation of the underling biological process. In particular, these type of stochastic simulations can be used to answer question related to how TFs perform the search process. For example, one could investigate whether molecules prefer to hop or to slide and what is the contribution of these two alternative movements on the DNA to the overall 1D random walk in a crowded environment. Building on the comprehensive model constructed in (N.R.Zabet and B.Adryan, submitted for publication), we developed GRiP (gene regulation in prokaryotes), a program that allows stochastic simulation of the search process of TFs for their target sites on the DNA. The analyzed systems can be large. For example, Escherichia.coli K-12 has a 4.6 Mbp genome and there are 10 4 DNA binding proteins (agents). To produce results within relative short time, previous software had to either rely on coarse grain models or to consider small subsystems . GRiP represents a new and efficient implementation of the TF search process, which considers a highly detailed model of 1D diffusion and, at the same time, it simulates at least 4 times faster than previous software . Consequently, by allowing genome-wide stochastic simulations of a highly detailed model of facilitated diffusion, GRiP can highlight possible biases in the results, where the level of details was insufficient (coarse grain models) or the size of the analyzed system was too small. A few studies, such as Das and Kolomeisky (2010), addressed the problem of facilitated diffusion through simulations focusing on the 3D diffusion rather than the 1D case. The 3D diffusion is time and resource consuming, especially for simulations at the genome level. vanshowed that the model based on the zerodimensional Chemical Master Equation can reliably represent the rate at which TFs associate non-specifically with the DNA, as long as the model takes into account that once a molecule unbinds from the DNA, it has a high probability of fast rebinding in close proximity. This suggests that there is no need to simulate the 3D diffusion explicitly, but rather have this replaced by a simple arrival rate and ensuring that the model incorporates the fast rebinding probability in the unbinding rate, a strategy which we also adopt.GRiP is a highly versatile program which comes with both command-line interface and graphical user interface. Furthermore, being written in Java, the software can be run on any machine where the Java Runtime Environment 1.6 (or higher) is installed. The program takes as input a parameters file, which can specify, among many other parameters, three additional data files, namely: (i) the DNA sequence file (from a FASTA file); (ii) TF file (a csv file with TF-specific characteristics) and, optionally; (iii) TF cooperativity file (a csv file). Note that, if either the DNA sequence file or the TF file are not provided, then the simulator can randomly generate that data (DNA sequence or TF species). Once started, the simulation runs until the time in the cell reaches a predefined stop time, or until all target sites are reached (if the stop time is set to 0). As output, the simulator can print information on: (i) the position of TF molecules on the DNA (or proportion of bound molecules to the DNA); (ii) computed affinity landscapes for each TF species; (iii) measured occupancy bias for each TF species; (iv) statistical information related to TF species (such as residence time, sliding lengths, actual sliding lengths, binding events etc.); (v) simulation speed; (vi) stored sliding lengths for each species; and (vii) statistics on collisions (total number, total number per species and hot spots on DNA). GRiP can simulate 1 s of E.coli K-12 and lacI using biologically plausible parameters between 1 h and 4 h (depending on the simulation parameters, the machine on which the simulation is run and even on the interface of the application, GUI or command line), which means that one can simulate up to 10 min of a bacterial cell within a month; for details see Supplementary Material. 
