HangOut: generating clean PSI-BLAST profiles for domains with long insertions Profile-based similarity search is an essential step in structure-function studies of proteins. However, inclusion of non-homologous sequence segments into a profile causes its corruption and results in false positives. Profile corruption is common in multidomain proteins, and single domains with long insertions are a significant source of errors. We developed a procedure (HangOut) that, for a single domain with specified insertion position, cleans erroneously extended PSI-BLAST alignments to generate better profiles. Availability: HangOut is implemented in Python 2.3 and runs on all Unix-compatible platforms. The source code is available under the GNU GPL license atPSI-BLAST is an indispensable tool for remote homology inference and structure-function predictions . However, false positives in PSI-BLAST can cause errors in automated annotations . One major source for such false positives is profile corruption, usually resulting from extension of alignments over non-homologous sequence regions . For instance, for two 2-domain proteins, AB and A C, PSI-BLAST may extend a correct alignment of the homologous domains A and A to include sequences from the non-homologous domains B and C. Despite significant effort devoted to this multidomain problem, no satisfactory solution exists (;). Currently, the best approach is to start PSI-BLAST with precisely defined query sequence bounds . However, we found that even a single, well-defined domain does not guarantee a corruption-free profile. Domains hosting insertions, which represent close to 5 of domains in the structural classification of proteins (SCOP) 1.75 database , may generate a corrupted PSI-BLAST profile due to incorrect alignment extension around the insertion position. Our analysis shows that the N-and C-terminal segments of the host domain To whom correspondence should be addressed.are frequently aligned as separate PSI-BLAST high scoring pairs (HSPs), and the two HSPs overlap when mapped onto the query sequence. Each alignment can be divided into two segments: (i) correctly aligned and (ii) incorrectly aligned or extended (and Supplementary). These incorrectly aligned overhangs are detected and removed by the HangOut program to clean the profile and prepare it for consequent remote homology searches with various tools, such as PSI-BLAST and HHsearch.HangOut is intended to clean PSI-BLAST generated profiles of erroneous extensions caused by domain insertions. One typical example of this domain problem is shown in: an / P-loop hydrolase (yellow in) is inserted into an -helical bundle (blue and red in). Corruption of the PSI-BLAST alignment built from hits to the -helical bundle is evidenced by a profilebased similarity search (HHsearch), which finds the / P-loop hydrolase domain with probability 98. Since the query -helical bundle does not share any sequence or structural similarities with the hydrolase domain, the high HHsearch probability results from profile corruption (for details see Supplementary). Given the success of this example, we tested the ability of HangOut to clean profiles of all SCOP domains with defined insertions (302 domains). As a basis for comparison, 91 PSI-BLAST profiles (30) were corrupted. RemoveHit cleans only 23 of these profiles, while HangOut cleans all but one . The single exception is probably due to distant homology, since both the host and inserted domain represent similar doubly wound Rossmann folds (Supplementary). Because the removal of sequence segments from alignments may deprive the profile, we also checked for the loss of true hits. Surprisingly, cleaned HangOut profiles retained 98 of the homologs found by PSI-BLAST profiles (99.6 for RemoveHit), suggesting that useful information is not lost from the profiles. Compared to RemoveHit, the complexities of HangOut that use domain boundary information are apparently needed to clean corrupted profiles. The presence of overlapping HSPs (removed by RemoveHit) does not sufficiently indicate corrupted segments. For remote homologs, only a single HSP may be found and incorrectly extended to cover part of the insertion. Although our current HangOut procedure does not offer a comprehensive solution to the multidomain problem, it addresses a special case of domains with insertions that represent the major source of profile corruption when PSI-BLAST is initiated with single, discontinuous domain queries. HangOut will be especially useful for large-scale bioinformatics efforts that are initiated from defined structure domains and require uncorrupt sequence profiles for subsequent analysis. Additional work will be done to offer a general solution without prior knowledge of domain boundaries. 
