Data and text mining HExpoChem: a systems biology resource to explore human exposure to chemicals Humans are exposed to diverse hazardous chemicals daily. Although an exposure to these chemicals is suspected to have adverse effects on human health, mechanistic insights into how they interact with the human body are still limited. Therefore, acquisition of curated data and development of computational biology approaches are needed to assess the health risks of chemical exposure. Here we present HExpoChem, a tool based on environmental chemicals and their bioactivities on human proteins with the objective of aiding the qualitative exploration of human exposure to chemicals. The chemicalprotein interactions have been enriched with a quality-scored human proteinprotein interaction network, a proteinprotein association network and a chemicalchemical interaction network, thus allowing the study of environmental chemicals through formation of protein complexes and phenotypic outcomes enrichment. Availability: HExpoChem is available at http://www.cbs.dtu.dk/ services/HExpoChem-1.0/.Humans, in their daily lives, are exposed to diverse hazardous chemicals through their environment, and it has been recognized as an important component in the interplay between genes, lifestyle/diet, natural environmental exposure and disease etiology . Hazardous chemicals are present in everything from food to consumer products to industrial effluents. However, knowledge about their mechanisms of action within the human body is still limited. As large-scale databases on chemical toxicity, i.e. ACToR and the Comparative Toxicogenomics Database (CTD;), are being assembled, investigation of the relationship between environmental chemicals and human diseases can be investigated much more systematically, not solely at the molecular level but also at the cellular and systems level. For example, integration of chemical toxicology within systems biology using proteinprotein interaction (PPI) and proteinprotein association network (PPAN) has been suggested to allow previously uncharacterized connections between chemical compounds and diseases to be revealed . Here, we present HExpoChem, a server with the aim to explore chemicals exposure and their impact on human health. HExpoChem is distinct from other tools, as (i) it provides information about the source of the chemical exposure, (ii) it identifies proteins interacting with a chemical and consequently suggests chemicalchemical interactions and qualitative cumulative risk of chemical mixtures and (iii) it integrates PPI and PPAN data into biological outcomes and environmental diseases using computational biology approaches. 
