High-dimensional pharmacogenetic prediction of a continuous trait using machine learning techniques with application to warfarin dose prediction in African Americans Motivation: With complex traits and diseases having potential genetic contributions of thousands of genetic factors, and with current genotyping arrays consisting of millions of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), powerful high-dimensional statistical techniques are needed to comprehensively model the genetic variance. Machine learning techniques have many advantages including lack of parametric assumptions, and high power and flexibility. Results: We have applied three machine learning approaches: Random Forest Regression (RFR), Boosted Regression Tree (BRT) and Support Vector Regression (SVR) to the prediction of warfarin maintenance dose in a cohort of African Americans. We have developed a multi-step approach that selects SNPs, builds prediction models with different subsets of selected SNPs along with known associated genetic and environmental variables and tests the discovered models in a cross-validation framework. Preliminary results indicate that our modeling approach gives much higher accuracy than previous models for warfarin dose prediction. A model size of 200 SNPs (in addition to the known genetic and environmental variables) gives the best accuracy. The R 2 between the predicted and actual square root of warfarin dose in this model was on average 66.4 for RFR, 57.8 for SVR and 56.9 for BRT. Thus RFR had the best accuracy, but all three techniques achieved better performance than the current published R 2 of 43 in a sample of mixed ethnicity, and 27 in an African American sample. In summary, machine learning approaches for high-dimensional pharmacogenetic prediction, and for prediction of clinical continuous traits of interest, hold great promise and warrant further research.We tested each machine learning technique (RFR, BRT and SVR) on a variety of different pharmacogenetic models listed in. Model 1 is similar to the previously tested model found to have an R 2 of 43 in an independent multi-ethnic cohort. Model 2 includes the variables in Model 1 as well as some additional previously identified associated genetic variants. The remaining models include the variables from Model 2 augmented by SNPs selected using single marker analysis in PLINK (see Section 2). The R 2 of each discovered model averaged over the training and testing partitions in the five-fold CV for RFR, BRT and SVR are shown in. In addition,shows a plot of the average R 2 for each model and each technique in the test partitions.shows that predictive accuracy as measured in the test partitions increases with larger models for all three methods tested until a peak at the M2+200 model, beyond which further increases in model size cause a slight decrease in predictive accuracy.). Standard error is given as the SD over test partitions divided by the square root of the number of test partitions. testing with a larger sample size may help decide between these two hypotheses. In terms of the overall predictive accuracy achieved as measured in the test partitions, the R 2 for Model 1, which is analogous to the previously tested model (IWPC, 2009), ranges from 25 to 30, which is less than the previously cited R 2 for this model in a multi-ethnic cohort, (43;), but is in agreement with previous estimates in populations of African descent . Model 2, which contains other known associated variants for warfarin doseresponse, is seen to have a modest increase in accuracy over Model 1, but significant increases in accuracy are seen with the addition of SNPs using each of the machine learning regression techniques tested. The highest predictive power was seen with RFR in which an average R 2 of 66.4 was achieved with Model 2 +200 SNPs. The other two methods tested, BRT and SVR, also show the highest predictive accuracy with the M2+200 model (56.9 for BRT and 57.8 for SVR). These R 2 values are much higher than the 27 reported by the IWPC for African Americans. Robustness of the proposed models is demonstrated in part by comparing the change in R 2 from training to testing partitions . The decrease in R 2 is seen to be very small or not existent, and in general within the error of the method, which suggests that our methodology is able to guard against overfitting. In addition, the fact that the predictive accuracy of our methods show a peak at a certain model size (Model 2 + 200 SNPs) and does not continue to increase demonstrates that mechanisms for preventing overfitting in each of the three methods tested are having the desired effect. Further improvements in predictive accuracy may be achieved if larger testing and training sets are used. Similarly, this approach may improve dose prediction for ethnic groups other than African American. Although RFR achieved the best performance in this study, all three techniques show improved prediction over the current model.In this article, we have demonstrated a practical approach for applying three commonly used machine learning techniques for continuous data, RFR, SVR and BRT, to create highly accurate predictive models using genome-wide genotype data and clinical variables. In an application to prediction of warfarin doseresponse in African Americans, all three methods tested, RFR, SVR and BRT, achieved better performance than currently published reports (IWPC), although the highest accuracy was achieved with RFR. This may be due to the robustness of RFR to overfitting in performing bootstrapping over thousands of trees. The results of this study indicate that even with a phenotype like warfarin maintenance dose that has many validated associated genetic variants of large effect, it is still important to include a large number of genotypic variables in a predictive model to capture the most genetic variance. Our results are consistent with the findings in that show that including only those SNPs found to have genome-wide significance in GWAS studies results in poorer predictive performance, and that much better performance is obtained with larger models. In considering which machine learning method to apply to GWAS-based predictive modeling of a continous trait, therePage: 1388 13841389 
