Genetics and population analysis HighSSR: high-throughput SSR characterization and locus development from next-gen sequencing data Motivation: Microsatellites are among the most useful genetic markers in population biology. High-throughput sequencing of microsatel-lite-enriched libraries dramatically expedites the traditional process of screening recombinant libraries for microsatellite markers. However, sorting through millions of reads to distill high-quality polymorphic markers requires special algorithms tailored to tolerate sequencing errors in locus reconstruction, distinguish paralogous loci, rarify raw reads originating from the same amplicon and sort out various artificial fragments resulting from recombination or concatenation of auxiliary adapters. Existing programs warrant improvement. Results: We describe a microsatellite prediction framework named HighSSR for microsatellite genotyping based on high-throughput sequencing. We demonstrate the utility of HighSSR in comparison to Roche gsAssembler on two Roche 454 GS FLX runs. The majority of the HighSSR-assembled loci were reliably mapped against model organism reference genomes. HighSSR demultiplexes pooled libraries, assesses locus polymorphism and implements Primer3 for the design of PCR primers flanking polymorphic microsatellite loci. As sequencing costs drop and permit the analysis of all project samples on next-generation platforms, this framework can also be used for direct simple sequence repeats genotyping.Microsatellites or simple sequence repeats (SSRs) are tandemly repeated DNA motifs 26 bp in length that typically harbor high levels of sequence polymorphism. This level of variability has led to widespread use of SSRs in many areas of molecular biology, including applications in forensics and paternity testing (, population genetics and conservation/management of biological resources . Until recently, the major obstacle to SSR use was slow and costly de novo isolation of SSRs for each taxon being investigated. SSR marker development has typically involved fractionation of the genome, enrichment for SSR-containing fragments, construction of a clone library from the enriched fraction, Sanger sequencing of clones and informatics analysis to identify SSR-containing fragments and PCR primer sites . The procedure continues with the evaluation of amplification efficiency and polymorphism of each locus. Thus, it entails considerable time and investment to develop the large numbers of SSRs necessary to study patterns of diversification between populations or to construct genetic maps . Next-generation sequencing technologies are revolutionizing the process of SSR discovery by reducing cost and time to a fraction of what was previously needed , but the millions of raw sequencing reads they produce necessitates in silico automation of SSR prediction and locus classification . In this article, we present the HighSSR framework for SSR discovery and locus development from 454-generated raw data. HighSSR facilitates the recognition of SSR motifs, the parsing of MID tagged sequences for identification of multiplexed samples, the identification of unique SSR loci within a sample and the development of PCR primers for the recovered loci. Unlike other methods, HighSSR first predicts SSRs for all input sequences and later uses the SSRs as pivots to assemble loci. In other words, it begins by grouping reads based on their SSR motif and proceeds toward locus identification through comparisons of the more complex flanking regions. The approach greatly reduces computational time by eliminating the need for all-against-all alignments, as implemented in QDD framework , and therefore permits SSR locus identification and development from millions of reads simultaneously. It also takes advantage of a PostgreSQL database for efficient data management throughout the process. In this article, we evaluate HighSSR using multiplexed SSR-enriched sequences collected on the Roche 454 GS-FLX platform. First (hereafter the first run), we examine two siblings of a non-model butterfly of conservation concern (Euphydryas anicia cloudcrofti) because previously reported Lepidoptera SSR primers (To whom correspondence should be addressed. failed for their genotyping. Next (hereafter the second run), we evaluate the performance of HighSSR in a multiplexed experiment of 60 species including mosquito, cress plant and chestnut blight fungus (Aedes aegypti, Arabidopsis thaliana and Cryphonectria parasitica, respectively) for which there are published genomes and also nine populations of Euphydryas butterfly without reference genomes.In the first run, HighSSR reduced 41:3 million raw sequence reads to 1901 unique SSR-containing loci with a consensus size of 36 nt shared between two samples (Tables 1, 4 and 5). The number of reconstructed loci is substantially lower than the number of putative loci (37 072) because paralogous loci and loci with flanking sequences of low complexity are removed. Three of 13 primer pairs chosen for genotyping from the first run were verified in three individuals by Sanger sequencing as reported in Supplementary Materials. The number of sequences demultiplexed from the second run is reported in Supplementary Materials and. Positively identified MIDs out-number false positives by two orders of magnitude. The number of predicted false positives compares directly to that predicted by Roche demultiplexing utility sffinfo with several hundred false positives per quarter plate region.lists the number of unique loci reconstructed using HighSSR in comparison to gsAssembler for model species in the second run. For all but one sample (A. aegypti), HighSSR recovered at least five times more loci than gsAssembler . In our experiments, we ran gsAssembler on raw reads from the same sample. Although gsAssembler can report microsatellite polymorphisms among the variants found, default assembly settings proved very rudimentary for efficient microsatellite handling. We mapped all loci recovered by HighSSR to the published genomes of A. thaliana, A. aegypti and C. parasitica using gsMapper with default parameters to test HighSSRs ability to assemble complex loci and parse orthologs into separate loci. All reconstructed loci were also reciprocally mapped with BLASTN (using an expectation threshold of 10 50 . Between 85 and 100 of all loci recovered by HighSSR mapped to the published genomes and 100 of the mapped regions corresponded to unique non-overlapping locations in the genome.. Locus reconstruction based on the MUSCLE guide tree. Consensuses D and X are treated as paralogs if they are too distant. Arrows indicate what consensuses are combined according to a guide tree toward unified consensus representing a multiple alignment combining corresponding raw reads. Schematic representation of multiple sequence alignment used for locus reconstruction. The consensus is reconstructed by assigning a nucleotide at each position most common in the multiple alignment column corresponding to that positionPrograms predicting SSRs within genomic DNA can be subdivided into several categories according to their underlying approach. RepeatMasker (http://www.repeatmasker.org) and DUST/SIMPLE are used to mask low-complexity fragments in biological sequences to speed up genome-wide pattern-match searches. STAR and TROLL look for predefined tandem motifs in the query sequence. TRF is a popular SSR prediction and scoring tool that is based on sound probabilistic model. TRDB , InSatdb , TRbase , VNTRfinder along with PolyPredictR (O) and UCSC genome browser use TRF as an internal microsatellite prediction engine. We also adopted TRF for SSR prediction following the observation that raw sequencing reads frequently contain sequencing artifacts and polymorphic variations. HighSSR represents an improvement over existing programs for the discovery of SSRs from next-generation sequence files.HighSSR reconstructs more loci than Roche gsAssembler (Newbler).Majority of the HighSSR assembled loci map against the reference genome. All the loci mapped against the reference genomes in unique non-overlapping positions. 
