Alloscore: a method for predicting allosteric ligand–protein interactions Allosteric ligands have increasingly gained attention as potential therapeutic agents due to their higher target selectivity and lower toxicity compared with classic orthosteric ligands. Despite the great interest in the development of allosteric drugs as a new tactic in drug discovery, the understanding of the ligandprotein interactions underlying allosteric binding represents a key challenge. Herein, we introduce Alloscore, a web server that predicts the binding affinities of allo-steric ligandprotein interactions. This method exhibits prominent performance in describing allo-steric binding and could be useful in allosteric virtual screening and the structural optimization of allosteric agonists/antagonists. Availability and implementation: The Alloscore server and tutorials are freely available at http://Allostery, as a major regulatory mechanism, is of fundamental importance in a wide variety of biological phenomena, including signal transduction, catalysis and metabolism . The functionality of allosteric proteins consists of their ability to orchestrate the activity of orthosteric sites in response to a signal, which is quintessentially fomented by effectors binding at distinct, often distant, functional sites, which are also referred to as allosteric sites . Compared with orthosteric ligands, which target highly conserved orthosteric sites, allosteric ligands can bind to any evident suitable pockets on protein surfaces. Thus, allosteric ligands are capable of discriminating between closely related proteins (e.g. receptors, protein kinases). This specific mode of action endows allosteric ligands with unparalleled advantages compared with orthosteric ligands, including higher specificity, fewer side effects and lower toxicity . Current drug discovery efforts under pharmaceutical regimes are increasingly investing in allosteric ligands, and structure-based drug design depends mainly on protein-ligand interactions. In this regard, characterizing allosteric ligandprotein interactions contributes to allosteric drug discovery . Despite the distinctive advantages shared by allosteric ligands, the development of allosteric drugs remains daunting, due to the special binding modes of allosteric ligandprotein interactions compared with orthosteric ligandprotein interactions. Recent studies have pinpointed conspicuous differences between the physicochemical properties of allosteric and orthosteric ligands . Allosteric ligands are generally more lipophilic and more rigid compounds than orthosteric ligands, which suggests that current universal computational algorithms are incapable of effectively portraying the associations of allosteric ligands with proteins. Thus, there is a pressing need for the development of a novel method to assess the binding affinities of unique allosteric ligandprotein interactions.In this study, we introduce Alloscore, a web server that predicts the binding affinities of allosteric ligandprotein interactions, for the first time. This method elaborately selects a subset of energy terms that are best suited to delineate the characteristics of allosteric binding. Alloscore exhibits good performance in dissecting allosteric binding and could be useful in allosteric virtual screening and structural optimization of allosteric agonists/antagonists.Using six selected energy terms (van de Waals, hydrogen bond and hydrophobic interactions between allosteric ligands and proteins, rotatable bonds in allosteric ligands and the buried volume and polar surfaces of ligands when binding to allosteric sites) and the experimental pK i values of the training set complexes, Alloscore was trained as an empirical linear regression model for evaluating allosteric protein-ligand binding affinities. The regression resulted in a value of 0.647 for Pearsons correlation coefficient, R (Rp) (Supplementary Table S1 and), which is superior to available popular binding prediction methods for the training set (Supplementary). The interpretation of the Alloscore model is straightforward based on coefficient signs and weights (Supplementary). Hydrophobicity (45.16), the buried ligand volume (18.70) and rotatable bonds (15.83) represent the three most important energy term contributions for allosteric interactions in the model (Supplementary), which is in good agreement with previous analyses of allosteric ligands and sites . To provide a more realistic estimate of the actual model performance, Alloscore was evaluated with an external test set in comparison with other methods. The result show that Alloscore clearly outperforms other methods in the prediction of allosteric proteinligand binding affinities , resulting in values of 0.764 and 0.800 for Rp and Spearmans R (Rs), respectively (Supplementary). Therefore, the specific model of Alloscore is expected to improve allosteric drug design and optimization in real-world scenario applications.The Alloscore web server conveniently provides a user-friendly interface to predict the binding affinities of allosteric ligandprotein interactions. Furthermore, critical energy contributions that contribute to allosteric binding are offered. To the best of our knowledge, this web server is the first of its kind and will be of considerable value to scientists interested in allosteric drug design and screening. 
