HubAlign: an accurate and efficient method for global alignment of protein–protein interaction networks Motivation: High-throughput experimental techniques have produced a large amount of proteinprotein interaction (PPI) data. The study of PPI networks, such as comparative analysis, shall benefit the understanding of life process and diseases at the molecular level. One way of comparative analysis is to align PPI networks to identify conserved or species-specific subnetwork motifs. A few methods have been developed for global PPI network alignment, but it still remains challenging in terms of both accuracy and efficiency. Results: This paper presents a novel global network alignment algorithm , denoted as HubAlign, that makes use of both network topology and sequence homology information, based upon the observation that topologically important proteins in a PPI network usually are much more conserved and thus, more likely to be aligned. HubAlign uses a minimum-degree heuristic algorithm to estimate the topological and functional importance of a protein from the global network topology information. Then HubAlign aligns topologically important proteins first and gradually extends the alignment to the whole network. Extensive tests indicate that HubAlign greatly outperforms several popular methods in terms of both accuracy and efficiency, especially in detecting functionally similar proteins. Availability: HubAlign is available freely for non-commercial purposes atHigh-throughput experimental techniques such as yeast-twohybrid and protein co-immunoprecipitation have produced a large amount of proteinprotein interaction (PPI) data for several organisms such as Homo sapiens and Saccharomyces cerevisiae . PPI networks contain a significant amount of information about modular organization of cells and protein functions. Comparative analysis such as alignment of PPI networks can help identify evolutionarily conserved pathways/complexes that may be structurally or functionally important and species-specific pathways/complexes, and infer protein functions. Similar to sequence alignment, we can also align PPI networks either locally or globally. Local network alignment (LNA) such as NetworkBlast , Mawish and AlignNemo aims to find small isomorphic subnetworks corresponding to pathways and protein complexes and thus may yield a many-to-many mapping between the proteins. These methods search for conserved subnetworks using an alignment graph, in which nodes correspond to groups of orthologous proteins and edges to conserved interactions. These methods mainly differ in building alignment graphs, the definition of dense clusters and search algorithms. Different from LNA, global network alignment (GNA) aims to maximize the overall match between the input networks. Such methods such as IsoRank (,b), Mawish, MI-GRAAL , GHOST , PISwap and NETAL are designed for pairwise alignment while others such as NetworkBlast, Graemlin 2.0 and IsoRankN for multiple alignment. In addition to network topology information, all network alignment algorithms excluding NETAL and MAGNA make use of sequence similarity to help improve alignment accuracy. IsoRank aligns two PPI networks by exploiting the observation that two proteins are good match if their interacting partners can match well. IsoRankN is an extension of IsoRank and mainly for multiple network alignment. It applies IsoRank to compute the alignment score between each pair of networks, and then employs a PageRank-Nibble algorithm to cluster all the proteins by their alignment score . Graemlin2.0 integrates network topology and phylogeny information and uses a hill-climbing algorithm to generate alignments . MI-GRAAL, an improved version of GRAAL, integrates network topology information such as graphlet signature and sequence similarity to align two nodes . GHOST uses graph spectrum to measure the topological similarity of proteins . Both MI-GRAAL and GHOST use a seedand-extend strategy to build an alignment. MI-GRAAL fulfills this by solving a weighted bipartite matching, while GHOST by solving a quadratic problem. PISwap refines an alignment generated by other tools such as IsoRank. It iteratively swaps the edges in an alignment until reaching an optimum . MAGNA uses a genetic algorithm to search for the best alignment (Saraph and Milenkovic,Milenkovic, 2013). NETAL aligns two proteins based upon their interacting partners. Current global network alignment methods have two major issues. One is that existing algorithms run slowly, especially in aligning very large PPI networks. The other is that the alignment accuracy is still low. This motivates us to develop a new method for global network alignment to significantly improve both alignment accuracy and computational efficiency. This paper presents a novel global network alignment algorithm, denoted as HubAlign, to align two PPI networks using both network topology and sequence homology information, based upon the observation that topologically and functionally To whom correspondence should be addressed. The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Non-Commercial License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/3.0/), which permits non-commercial re-use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited. For commercial re-use, please contact journals.permissions@oup.com important proteins (such as hubs and bottlenecks) in a PPI network are more conserved and thus, shall be aligned. We use a minimum-degree heuristic method to estimate the relative importance of one protein from the global network topology information. Such a score reflects the topological and functional importance of one protein in a PPI network. Then, we use a greedy algorithm to align two proteins based upon the combination of their importance scores and sequence similarity. That is, we align more important proteins first and then gradually less important. Such a procedure is more biologically meaningful and leads to a much faster and more accurate alignment algorithm. We have tested HubAlign on both prokaryotic and eukaryotic PPI networks, showing that HubAlign greatly outperforms several popular methods such as IsoRank, MI-GRAAL, GHOST and PISwap in terms of both alignment accuracy and running time.We compare our algorithm HubAlign with several popular and publicly available global network alignment methods IsoRank (,b), MI-GRAAL , GHOST and PISwap . Following, we use the alignment produced by GRAAL and IsoRank as input of PISwap. We do not compare HubAlign with Graemlin 2.0 , because the latter requires the knowledge of phylogenetic relationship among species. We do not compare HubAlign with GRAAL because MI-GRAAL is an improved version of GRAAL. Following Kuchaievs work , we evaluate network alignment quality by five measures including edge correctness (EC), largest common connected subgraph (LCCS), symmetric substructure score (S 3 ), functional consistency (FC) and average of functional similarity (AFS). Meanwhile, EC, LCCS and S 3 reflect network topological similarity of an alignment, but not biological significance. FC and AFS reflect biological significance by measuring the consistency of the GO (gene ontology) terms assigned to the aligned proteins. FC and AFS shall be more important metrics than EC, LCCS and S 3. The alignment accuracy of two PPI networks depends not only on the evolutionary distance of two respective species, but also on the quality of the PPI data. That is, the closer the two species are or the higher quality the PPIs are, the better alignment we may obtain. Edge correctness (EC). It is calculated as the percentage of edges in the first network that are aligned to edges in the second network. Here we assume the first network is smaller than the second one. Let V 1 ; E 1 and V 2 ; E 2 denote two networks under alignment where V and E denote nodes and edges, respectively and g : V 1 ! V 2 be an alignment. Mathematically, EC is defined as follows.Symmetric substructure score (S 3 ). The intuition underlying S 3 is to penalize the alignments that map sparse regions of the network to denser ones and vise-versa (Saraph and Milenkovic,Milenkovic, 2013). Let GV denote the induced subnetwork of G with node set V and EG denote the edge set ofLargest common connected subgraph (LCCS). It is calculated as the number of edges in the largest connected subgraph in an alignment. Larger and denser subgraphs give more insight into common topology of the network . In addition, the larger and denser subgraphs may be more biologically important , as Bader and Spirin have shown that a dense PPI subnetwork may correspond to a vital protein complex . Functional consistency (FC). We use GO (gene ontology) terms to measure the functional consistency of two aligned proteins. GO terms describe some biological properties of a protein such as Cellular Component (CC), Molecular Function (MF) and Biological Process (BP). We exclude root GO terms from the analysis. Proteins with similar GO terms are supposed to be functionally similar. To analyze the biological significance of an alignment, we calculate the fraction of aligned proteins sharing common GO terms. The fraction is calculated with respect to the size of the smaller network because in a global alignment all nodes of smaller network are aligned to nodes of larger network. The larger the fraction, the more biologically meaningful the alignment is. Average of functional similarity (AFS). It is calculated based on the semantic similarity of the GO terms, which depends on the distance between them in the ontology. We can use semantic similarity measures to calculate the functional similarity in each category of BP, MF and CC. Schlickers similarity, based on the Resnik ontological similarity, is one of the best performing methods for computing the functional similarity between proteins . Let s c u; v denote the GO functional similarity of proteins u and v in category c (i.e., BP, MF or CC). AFS is defined as follows.This paper has presented a new method HubAlign for global alignment of two PPI networks by making use of topological importance of proteins in a PPI network. We have implemented and tested HubAlign using quite a few PPI networks and evaluated the resultant alignments using different performance metrics. We have also compared HubAlign with currently popular global network alignment algorithms such as IsoRank, MIGRAAL, NETAAL, GHOST and PISwap. Experimental results indicate that our algorithm greatly outperforms the others in terms of both alignment accuracy and running time. In particular, our algorithm can align many more functionally similar proteins. 
