HYCUD: a computational tool for prediction of effective rotational correlation time in flexible proteins Motivation: A large fraction of eukaryotic proteins contain unstructured tails or linkers. The presence of flexible regions allows these systems to experience a high level of mobility facilitating their biological function. The complex nature of protein rotation in such flexible modular systems precludes a straightforward application of hydrodynamic methods to calculate their rotational mo-tional properties. We describe the workflow of HYdrodynamic CoUpling of Domains (HYCUD), a program for prediction of effective rotational correlation times in multidomain proteins. The usage of HYCUD is demonstrated by its application to the ribosomal protein L7/L12. Rotational correlation times predicted by HYCUD might be used to detect molecular switch events mediated by disorder-order transitions in interdomain linkers. Availability and implementation: The source code and documentation are available at www. mpibpc.mpg.de/106144/software.The function of biological macromolecules depends on their internal mobility supported by the presence of intrinsically disordered regions . Reorientational motion of biomolecules can be followed through a variety of experimental techniques . However, for slowly tumbling systems, the use of these experimental techniques is limited. On the other hand, theoretical prediction of rotational motional behavior through standard hydrodynamic methods is complicated in these systems by the presence of several potentially coupled motions . To overcome these problems, modification of rigid-body hydrodynamics as well as Brownian dynamics of coarse-grained models with the inclusion of hydrodynamic interactions have been employed. Here, we describe the workflow of a recently developed alternative approach called HYdrodynamic CoUpling of Domains (HYCUD) to predict the rotational correlation time (s c ) of protein domains within flexible modular systems. The details of the HYCUD method, together with its application to the flexible two-domain ribosomal protein L7/L12 and protein X of Sendai virus, are reported.The 120-residue L7/L12 ribosomal protein contains two globular domains, an N-terminal domain (NTD) responsible for protein dimerization and a C-terminal domain (CTD) . The NTD and CTD are connected via a long flexible linker . Here, we first generated an ensemble of 5000 random structures for the dimeric L7/L12 protein using the EOM program (Supplementary). Subsequently, HYCUD calculations were performed to predict the effective s c of the dimerized NTD and each CTD within the full-length protein dimers. Supplementaryshows that the HYCUD prediction for both NTD and CTD converged within an ensemble size of 5001000. The s c distribution within the ensemble of dimeric L7/ L12 is shown in. S2B. Supplementarypresents the results of HYCUD calculations. Close agreement with the experimental results was obtained considering the uncertainty range of experimental data and 5 inaccuracy in hydrodynamic calculations . Further support for the validity of HYCUD is provided by the excellent agreement between predicted and experimental s c of the 53-residue domain of protein X from Sendai virus (Supplementaryand Supplementary) as well as several other examples reported in Rezaei(Supplementary). In conclusion, we described a computational tool to predict the effective rotational correlation time of domains in flexible multidomain proteins. The presented tool is easy to use and provides users insight into the rotational motion of protein modules within dynamic modular biomolecules. 
