Data and text mining ICT: isotope correction toolbox Isotope tracer experiments are an invaluable technique to analyze and study the metabolism of biological systems. However, isotope labeling experiments are often affected by naturally abundant isotopes especially in cases where mass spectrometric methods make use of derivatiza-tion. The correction of these additive interferencesin particular for complex isotopic systemsis numerically challenging and still an emerging field of research. When positional information is generated via collision-induced dissociation, even more complex calculations for isotopic interference correction are necessary. So far, no freely available tools can handle tandem mass spectrom-etry data. We present isotope correction toolbox, a program that corrects tandem mass isotopomer data from tandem mass spectrometry experiments. Isotope correction toolbox is written in the multi-platform programming language Perl and, therefore, can be used on all commonly available computer platforms.Isotope labeling experiments play a crucial role in exploring, studying and understanding metabolic pathways in biological systems. However, the obtained isotopolog and tandem mass isotopomer signals are biased by natural abundant isotopes of the native molecules and of atoms introduced via derivatization . Consequently, the natural abundance results in a distortion of the experimental data. The correction of mass spectrometry data is still an emerging field of research , as it is non-trivial and numerically challenging, in particular, if a large number of isotopes are considered during the correction procedure. There exist several software tools which are able to compute the contribution of intensities from the natural abundant isotopes on the measured intensities and hence are capable to correct the measured data. Pynac (http://files.cesb.uky.edu/software/PYNAC/) is a correction software written in the programming language Python. Pynac benefits from the multi-platform capabilities of Python is highly flexible by using text files for configuration and setup and can account for any number of isotopes. However, it is not able to correct data from tandem mass spectrometry experiments. Another prominent available program is IsoCor (http://metasys.insa toulouse.fr/software/isocor/). IsoCor is also implemented in Python and is a fast and excellent tool to correct mass spectrometry data. It supports the correction of the natural abundance of the tracer at unlabeled positions and allows to take into account the isotopic purity of the labeling source. Furthermore, in IsoCor, any isotope and not only 13 C can be used as tracer. Though IsoCor is also not able to deal with tandem mass isotopomer data. In this application note, wepresent a novel software tool named isotope correction toolbox (ICT), which is also able to deal with ion fragmentation and, hence, can correct mass spectra obtained by tandem mass spectrometry.We have successfully used our program on Linux, Mac OS X and Windows computers. To verify the results of ICT, we performed numerous correction runs of non-fragmentation mass spectrometry data and compared them with results, which we obtained by using IsoCor. We found an excellent agreement between the corrected data computed by ICT and IsoCor. The verification of the correction procedure for tandem mass spectrometry data was performed by comparing the results of ICT with a large set of corrected data which we obtained by utilizing a (slow and inefficient) Microsoft Excel based method. Typically, the correction for a smaller problem takes a fraction of a second. For instance, running a batch of 585 correction procedures taking into account the natural abundance of carbon and silicon for a variety of compounds, such as amino acids and low molecular weight organic acids, took approximately 20 s. Larger problems, such as the correction of interferences caused by the natural abundance of carbon, hydrogen, nitrogen, oxygen and silicon for ethoximated/trimethylsilylated sedoheptulose-7phosphate (C29H73N1O10P1Si7), can usually be done within less than 1 s. 
