Genome analysis Identification of chromosomal translocation hotspots via scan statistics Motivation: The detection of genomic regions unusually rich in a given pattern is an important undertaking in the analysis of next-generation sequencing data. Recent studies of chromosomal translocations in activated B lymphocytes have identified regions that are frequently translocated to c-myc oncogene. A quantitative method for the identification of translocation hotspots was crucial to this study. Here we improve this analysis by using a simple probabilistic model and the framework provided by scan statistics to define the number and location of translocation breakpoint hotspots. A key feature of our method is that it provides a global chromosome-wide nominal control level to clustering, as opposed to previous methods based on local criteria. While being motivated by a specific application, the detection of unusual clusters is a widespread problem in bioinformatics. We expect our method to be useful in the analysis of data from other experimental approaches such as of ChIP-seq and 4C-seq. Results: The analysis of translocations from B lymphocytes with the method described here reveals the presence of longer hotspots when compared with those defined previously. Further, we show that the hotspot size changes substantially in the absence of DNA repair protein 53BP1. When 53BP1 deficiency is combined with overexpression of activation-induced cytidine deaminase, the hotspot length increases even further. These changes are not detected by previous methods that use local significance criteria for clustering. Our method is also able to identify several exclusive translocation hotspots located in genes of known tumor supressors. Availability and implementation: The detection of translocation hot-spots is done with hot_scan, a program implemented in R and Perl. Source code and documentation are freely available for download at https://github.com/itojal/hot_scan.The identification of genomic regions that are unusually rich in a given pattern is a recurring problem in bioinformatics, widespread in the analysis of data generated by deep-sequencing. An example of this is the detection of regions with an unlikely high clustering of chromosomal translocation breakpoints . Recurrent chromosomal translocations are associated with hematopoietic malignancies such as leukemia and lymphoma and with some sarcomas and carcinomas . There is growing evidence that translocations are not random. Among basic determinants of these events are the existence of chromosome territories, active transcription and most prominently targeted DNA damage . DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs) are necessary intermediates in chromosome rearrangements, and they occur in the cell during normal metabolic processes, and can be induced by genotoxic agents or during physiological DNA recombination in lymphocytes. The majority of human lymphomas are of mature B cell origin, and many of them carry balanced chromosomal translocations that involve immunoglobulin genes . This susceptibility is most likely dependent on activation-induced cytidine deaminase (AID), the B lymphocytespecific enzyme that initiates class switch recombination (CSR) and somatic hypermutation (SHM), two processes necessary for antibody diversification . AID initiates SHM and CSR by deaminating cytosines in immunoglobulin genes during stalled transcription . Several DNA repair pathways process the resulting U:G mismatch to introduce mutations or produce targeted DSB (Di). Besides being targeted to immunoglobulin genes, AID targets a large number of nonimmunoglobulin genes . AID-induced DSBs are recognized by DNA damage response proteins and repaired by nonhomologous end joining, a process that can fail and result in chromosomal translocations . Libraries of AID-dependent translocations from primary B To whom correspondence should be addressed. cells revealed many discrete sites throughout the genome that are targeted by AID. Some of these targets are known translocation partners identified in mature B cell lymphomas . Mutations in the components of DNA repair pathways that process AID-induced breaks can lead to defective CSR, and the most severe defect is documented in 53BP1-deficient B cells. 53BP1 is a DNA repair protein that regulates DSB processing and is required for genomic stability. It does so by facilitating distal DSB joining and by protecting DNA ends from resection . The landscape of AIDinduced translocations in 53BP1-deficient B cells is different from the one found in wild-type cells. Deep sequencing of translocation capture libraries from primary 53BP1-deficient B lymphocytes has shown that the profile of translocation hotspots changes most likely owing to increased DNA end resection . A quantitative method to determine the clustering of translocations was essential for the analysis of chromosomal rearrangements in. Translocation hotspots were determined by using a technique similar to that used to define the coordinates of enriched protein-binding regions in ChIP-seq experiments. A translocation cluster is defined by concatenating closely spaced adjacent breakpoints, and its significance is then determined by using a test based on the negative binomial distribution. This method assumes that the observed breakpoints are realization of a Bernoulli process. By taking advantage of this model, here we consider a different approach for the detection of hotspots based on the use of scan statistics . The scan statistic is well suited for this task because it provides a genome-wide level to breakpoint clustering. Using our method, we are able to show that translocation hotspots induced by AID in activated B lymphocytes are longer than those previously identified by the local method. Furthermore, our method shows that long hotspots are more frequent in the absence of 53BP1. The frequency of the long hotspots is further increased if AID is overexpressed in 53BP1deficient B cells. We also discover a set of hotspots exclusively found by the scan statistic and discuss the potential biological relevance of our findings.Here we describe a method for the identification of chromosomal translocation hotspots. In contrast to a previous procedure, which we refer here to as the local method, the control level for the detection of a cluster is defined on a chomosome-wide basis by using scan statistics. We show via simulations that scan statistics perform equally well as the local method in datasets where the hotspots are relatively obvious. Scan statistics are superior than the local method in more challenging situations, characterized by a higher translocation rate outside hotspot regions. This depends on the width of the scanning window, and its choice requires some calibration. We present a method that is able to accomplish this. We show that inferences made with scan statistics have important consequences in the analysis of translocation hotspots in primary B cells. The previous study byshowed that 53BP1 deficiency results in an increase of rearrangements to intergenic regions and changes the frequency and distribution of translocations in 3 , 1 immunoglobulin switch regions and other 16 prominent hotspots. Our analysis adds to these findings by showing that the 53BP1 deficiency results in the overall enrichment of longer hotspots. These results support the previous conclusion that 53BP1 prevents the resection of DNA, thus resulting in shorter hotspots . Our analysis here also shows that an increased amount of AID results in a substantial enlargement of pre-existing hotspot regions. These changes can only be observed with wider scanning windows (i.e with w = 2000, 2500 and 5000), and are not detected by previous methods because of their local characterization of clustering. The success of the scan statistic here is brought by its ability to detect events spread across several scales as is shown by the analyses made with several scanning window widths. Our analysis with the scan statistic is able to identify several exclusive hotspots whose authenticity is supported by independent 
