Bioimage informatics img2net: automated network-based analysis of imaged phenotypes Automated analysis of imaged phenotypes enables fast and reproducible quantification of biologically relevant features. Despite recent developments, recordings of complex networked structures, such as leaf venation patterns, cytoskeletal structures or traffic networks, remain challenging to analyze. Here we illustrate the applicability of img2net to automatedly analyze such structures by reconstructing the underlying network, computing relevant network properties and statistically comparing networks of different types or under different conditions. The software can be readily used for analyzing image data of arbitrary 2D and 3D network-like structures. Availability and Implementation: img2net is open-source software under the GPL and can be downloaded from http://mathbiol.mpimp-golm.mpg.de/img2net/, where supplementary information and data-sets for testing are provided.Biological and man-made systems, ranging from biochemical reactions to neural and social interactions, can often be represented as networks, with nodes and edges representing the components and their interactions, respectively. Network representations facilitate not only intuitive visualization but also quantitative studies of the systems structure and dynamics. Spatial networks constitute an import subclass, which includes networks, such as leaf venation , cellular cytoskeleton and city streets (Barth elemy, 2011). While some of these networks, like city infrastructure, have been well-characterized, others, like biological spatial networks, remain poorly understood. Snapshots of spatial networks can be obtained by imaging technologies. The computational challenge is that of extracting the underlying networks from the gathered images in a fast and reliable fashion, and of examining the reconstructions to reveal the underlying organizational principles. The existing image-based methods for reconstruction of biological networks are typically designed for specific types of networks: tree-like networks for plant root architectures ; fungal or leaf venation networks ; or neuronal topology of the human connectome created, which contains the values of the network properties for the analyzed networks and their null models to allow further analyses and visualizations of the results. img2net generates standard plots as .svg files: for each experiment, a reconstructed network overlaying the original image data is saved. For all analyzed network properties, plots of the resulting time series are generated to facilitate network comparisons.For testing, img2net was used to compare confocal recordings of the actin cytoskeleton (and C) of untreated plant cells and cells treated with an actin disrupting drug . We find that the actin networks of treated cells display a consistently lower assortativity , indicating a drugrelated filament fragmentation. Further, for untreated cells, the observed networks display significantly smaller average path lengths (accessibility) and significantly higher algebraic connectivities (robustness) than expected by chance (P-values estimated from the null model via one-sample t-tests;), suggesting a biological basis for the maintenance of short and robust transportation routes. We also used img2net to analyze the network structure of the German autobahn, which was obtained from OpenStreetMap as an image by using a gray-scale coding of the speed limits . We find that, similar to the actin cytoskeleton, the autobahn shows significantly smaller path lengths and a higher algebraic connectivity than expected by chance. 
