Gene expression Improved quality control processing of peptide-centric LC-MS proteomics data Motivation: In the analysis of differential peptide peak intensities (i.e. abundance measures), LC-MS analyses with poor quality peptide abundance data can bias downstream statistical analyses and hence the biological interpretation for an otherwise high-quality dataset. Although considerable effort has been placed on assuring the quality of the peptide identification with respect to spectral processing, to date quality assessment of the subsequent peptide abundance data matrix has been limited to a subjective visual inspection of run-by-run correlation or individual peptide components. Identifying statistical outliers is a critical step in the processing of proteomics data as many of the downstream statistical analyses [e.g. analysis of variance (ANOVA)] rely upon accurate estimates of sample variance, and their results are influenced by extreme values. Results: We describe a novel multivariate statistical strategy for the identification of LC-MS runs with extreme peptide abundance distributions. Comparison with current method (run-by-run correlation) demonstrates a significantly better rate of identification of outlier runs by the multivariate strategy. Simulation studies also suggest that this strategy significantly outperforms correlation alone in the identification of statistically extreme liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS) runs.The majority of statistical strategies to assess peptide/protein differential abundances from liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS) proteomic experiments are based on analysis of variance (ANOVA) methodologies applied to peak intensities (i.e. abundance measures) of proteolytic peptides . However, To whom correspondence should be addressed. the ANOVA approach relies upon accurate estimates of sample variance, and proteomics studies not only have inherent variability associated with the biological samples, but potentially diverse process-based sources of variability. That is, the accurate estimate of sample variances is often difficult to obtain. For example, sample preparation protocols and instrument variations associated with the LC column (particularly important for multi-column platforms) and mass spectrometer can cause variations in peak intensities, as well as peptides identified across MS analyses within an experiment. Data quality is especially important when the number of biological samples is small, often the case in proteomics experiments, and extreme values can negatively influence all subsequent data analysis outcomes. Identification of statistical outliers in univariate data is an established but highly debated statistical topic . There are many consecutive outlier procedures, focusing on one suspect value at a time, that have been proposed and implemented across many fields of application, such as Grubbs test and Dixons Q-test . Because these methods iteratively remove outlier points, the false positive rate (i.e. Type 1 error) is inflated . In contrast, recursive outlier detection procedures detect the presence of any number of outliers and control Type 1 errors. For example, Jain (2010) presents a recursive version of Grubbs test andderived a sequential application of Wilkss multivariate outlier test. There are downfalls to these recursive procedures: (i) they are designed for univariate data, and if applied to multivariate data, will likely fail to detect statistically influential extreme values, and (ii) they are negatively affected by masking (i.e. the inability to detect an outlier in the presence of another outlier) and swamping (i.e. identify non-outliers as outliers) effects. The identification of statistical outliers in multivariate data, such as microarray and proteomic data, is non-trivial. The multiple dimensions of the data often subject outliers to masking . The microarray community, however, has made considerable progress in applying statistical metrics to assess the quality of microarray data . Of particular applicability to proteomics data are the ideas presented byThey note that a poor quality array will impede the statistical and biological significance of the analysis due to the added noise. This is also true for proteomics data. That is, poor quality peptide abundance data will hinder downstream statistical analysis, including normalization, and subsequent biological interpretations.Page: 2867 28662872Simulations of size 500 based on the p-variate standard normal distribution Np(0,I), and an empirically influenced p-variate normal distribution Np(,) were performed to examine a range of outlier configurations. In addition, we assessed the performance of the multi-dimensional outlier detection method against the conventional method of using a Pearsons correlation coefficient [previously described in Section 2.1 as metric 1Equation(1)] to ascertain whether a LC-MS run is an outlier. Simulation is useful to investigate the properties of rMd-PAV, however; since simulation of expected distribution parameters in real proteomics data is not well understood, these results are presented in Supplementary Material . The results of the multi-dimensional outlier detection analysis are displayed in a simple yet effective graphic in which rMd-PAV scores are plotted for each LC-MS run and compared with a reference line representing the 2 critical value. For improved visualization, the rMd-PAV scores and the 2 critical value are transformed to the log 2 scale. The red horizontal line represents the log 2 ( 2 0.9999,5 ) critical value. That is, at a significance level of 0.0001, a LC-MS run may be classified as a statistical outlier if the calculated test statistic 2 0.9999,5 critical value, or equivalently, the 2 P 0.0001. LC-MS runs with log 2 (rMd-PAV) scores above the red horizontal line are suspect and should be removed from the dataset.Outlier detection in multivariate data is a non-trivial statistical task often subject to the masking effect . Caution should always be taken when removing data from any dataset, large or small, and data should not be removed solely on the grounds of a statistical outlier test. Rather, the results of any statistical outlier algorithm used should always be reviewed in the context of the research goal and the experiment. Often the extreme data values are of interest and may explain technical difficulties in the process (e.g. sample preparation issues, technical difficulties with instrumentation and a mislabeling of samples). However, as with any statistical analysis and especially those dealing with small sample sizes, reviewing the outcome of the analysis is imperative. Specifically, graphical methods allow the analyst to review the analysis in a stepwise manner. For example, as our first step, we first plot the peptide abundances observed in the experiment for each LC-MS run using a box plot. Then to understand how the abundance distributions vary across the LC-MS runs we examine the scores plot resulting from the robust PCA.We have presented a novel approach to the identification of statistical outliers in LC-MS proteomics peptide abundance data. The value of the multivariate outlier discovery strategy utilizing rMd-PAV scores is the use of an objective probabilistic model to assess statistical certainty of the exclusion of runs within an experiment in the context of the complete dataset. Proteomics has placed considerable effort on assuring the quality of the peptide identification with respect to spectral processing ; however, quality assessment of the subsequent data matrix has focused on subjective visual inspection of run-by-run correlation, or individual peptide components. The quality of the LC-MS peptide abundance data matrix is essential to the identification of robust biomarkers. Moreover, statistical evaluation of the data relies upon tools often based on linear models, such as ANOVA which require accurate estimates of variance . Without proper identification of statistical outlier runs the estimates of variance will be inflated, which may have a considerable effect on the identification of significant peptides and proteins. 
