Improved transcript isoform discovery using ORF graphs Motivation: High-throughput sequencing of RNA in vivo facilitates many applications, not the least of which is the cataloging of variant splice isoforms of protein-coding messenger RNAs. Although many solutions have been proposed for reconstructing putative isoforms from deep sequencing data, these generally take as their substrate the collective alignment structure of RNA-seq reads and ignore the biological signals present in the actual nucleotide sequence. The majority of these solutions are graph-theoretic, relying on a splice graph representing the splicing patterns and exon expression levels indicated by the spliced-alignment process. Results: We show how to augment splice graphs with additional information reflecting the biology of transcription, splicing and translation , to produce what we call an ORF (open reading frame) graph. We then show how ORF graphs can be used to produce isoform predictions with higher accuracy than current state-of-the-art approaches. Availability and implementation: RSVP is available as C source code under an open-source licence: http://ohlerlab.mdc-berlin. de/software/RSVP/.High-throughput sequencing of RNA transcripts facilitates many applications, including gene expression analysis, single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) detection, discovery of unannotated genes and cataloging of different splice isoforms for individual loci. As the cost of sequencing continues to decline, RNA transcript assays will become increasingly common, and efficient computational methods for extracting biological knowledge from the resulting data will become increasingly crucial. The cataloging of splice isoform variants of protein-coding genes remains an especially important goal, as the range of possible downstream effects following the transcription of a gene is constrained by the variety of transcripts that can be produced from that locus. Various other applications using transcriptomic data rely on knowing the set of transcripts that can be produced by each gene. Even if not every transcript from a protein-coding locus results in stable protein production, identification of those transcripts that do likely produce proteins and an accurate characterization of the protein isoforms produced remain important steps in the process of understanding individual transcription units. Unfortunately, few genomes currently have complete annotations of all splice variants of all genes. Although a full-length sequencing of whole transcripts promises to become technologically feasible in the future, at present the inference of the whole transcript structure from short RNA sequencing reads in eukaryotic organisms depends on computational methods for assembling exons into complete structures. In the case of functional protein-coding transcripts, these structures should contain a valid open reading frame (ORF) capable of being translated into a functional protein, i.e. beginning with a valid start codon (AUG) and ending with a valid stop codon (UGA, UAA or UAG) in the same period-3 phase. Current methods for discovering splice isoforms from short RNA sequencing reads fall into roughly two categories: those that explicitly perform (spliced) alignment of reads to a reference genome, and those that instead perform de novo assembly of reads without an explicit reference. Given the increasing availability of near-complete genomic sequences, we have focused on the first category. Reference-based methods typically use the mapping of spliced reads to induce a structure, called splice graph, in which each vertex represents an exon and each edge represents an intron. Paths through the graph represent individual combinations of exons comprising putative transcript isoforms. De novo methods also use a graph, called a de Bruijn graph, in which paths again represent transcripts (though vertices now represent k-mers). Thus, graph-theoretic algorithms based on path enumeration are common to most methods of transcript assembly from RNA sequencing data. Although splice graphs are highly informative to the transcript assembly process because of their inclusion of information about both splicing patterns and relative exon inclusion levels, they lack any information about underlying nucleotide patterns. In particular, they provide no immediate means of determining whether a path through the graph corresponds to a transcript with a valid ORF. For protein-coding genes, this is one of the most important constraints in determining whether a transcript can encode a viable protein, as translation occurs only in ORFs. To whom correspondence should be addressed.In this article, we show how to augment splice graphs with additional information reflecting the biology of transcription, splicing and translation, to produce what we call an ORF graph. ORF graphs contain explicit phase information, allowing efficient enumeration of isoforms containing a valid ORF, and they permit phase-specific scoring of individual transcript elements, so that isoforms can be efficiently ordered by their likelihood under some joint sequence model. In this way, ORF graphs provide more than simply an indication of whether a putative transcript contains an ORF: via the vertex and edge scores, they provide information regarding coding potential and splice site strength, and via the phase information, they provide an efficient means of ranking exon combinations without invoking the combinatorial explosion of exhaustive enumeration. Finally, we present an efficient software implementation, called RSVP (RNA-seq Variant Prediction), which achieves higher prediction accuracy than current state-of-the-art approaches for identifying transcript isoforms. Our implementation has the advantage that it does not depend on particular library preparation protocols (e.g. strand-specific libraries, paired-end reads), although the ORF graph formalism is flexible enough that many such considerations could be accommodated. Our implementation is made available under an open-source software license.We assessed the accuracy of RSVP by applying it to librarynormalized RNA-seq data collected from Arabidopsis thaliana seedlings and flowers (; see Supplementary Material for comparisons on human data.). This model organism is highly suitable for comparative testing of transcript-based approaches to isoform reconstruction, because of its relatively small introns, small numbers of exons per gene and large proportion of single-exon genes. TAIR10 human-curated annotations were partitioned into a training set consisting of all genes on chromosome 1, and a test set consisting of a subset of the remaining TAIR10 genes filtered to be nonredundant with the training set by ensuring that no test gene and training gene were 480 similar over 80 of their length according to BLASTN (Basic Local Alignment Search Tool / Nucleotides) . This resulted in 7078 training genes and 17 617 test genes. Because we wished to test the ability of RSVP to identify alternative splice isoforms of known genes, we reduced the test set to 4230 genes each having multiple splice isoforms annotated in TAIR10, and we applied RSVP to a genomic interval extending from 50 bp upstream of the most 5 0 annotated start codon for the gene to 50 bp downstream of the most 5 0 annotated stop codon. Alignment of reads to the genome was performed by Bowtie 2 and Tophat 2 , and these were processed into pileup files by SAMtools . We further separated the test set into two subsets, a high-coverage set for which FPKM (fragments per kilobase of sequence per million reads mapped) was at least 1 (3888 genes) and a low-coverage set for which 0.1 FPKM51 (207 genes). We ran the N-best algorithm for values of N ranging from 1 to 20. For comparison, we also applied three previously published tools: Cufflinks 2 , Scripture and iReckon . Because these programs predict transcripts without indicating the reading frame and the translation start and stop sites, we examined all possible ORFs and took the longest to be their intended prediction. Splice sites were also filtered to include only the most common splice consensuses in TAIR10 (donor sites: GT/GC/ AT; acceptor sites: AG/AC). We also applied the ab initio gene finder GeneZilla to serve as a baseline. To assess the utility of ORF graphs for discriminating coding from non-coding loci, we applied RSVP to a set of 2707 putative lincRNAs (long interspersed non-coding loci) obtained from Liu et al. (2012) and additionally to a set of 807 transcribed loci of length at least 200 nt identified by Cufflinks as having FPKM ! 1 but not falling within 50 nt of any annotated TAIR10 protein-coding gene. For this experiment, we disabled RNA scoring ( RNA 0) in case of possible confounding biases in expression levels. As illustrated in, RSVP achieves higher exon and transcript sensitivity than all three competing programs when making roughly the same numbers of predictions on annotated coding genes. Exon sensitivity is defined as the proportion of TAIR10 exons in the held-out test set that were included in the set of predicted transcripts, where an exons begin and end coordinates must be predicted exactly correctly to be counted as a found exon. Similarly, a TAIR10 transcript is considered to be found by a predictor if one of the predicted transcripts exactly matches (for all exon coordinates, including translation start/ stop codon coordinates) a TAIR10 transcript. We do not evaluate specificity, as the premise for applying tools of this type is that the set of annotations is incomplete, and therefore the false-positive rate cannot be reliably estimated based on existing annotations alone. In lieu of specificity, we plot the number of predictions (x-axis), which is expected to scale inversely with specificity.additionally shows that when using both DNA and RNA evidence, RSVP produces higher exon and transcript sensitivity at roughly equal prediction counts, for both low-FPKM and high-FPKM genes, than when DNA scores are omitted. As expected, the effect was greater for low-FPKM genes, where the use of DNA evidence may compensate for sampling error and gaps in coverage by low RNA read counts. This underscores the importance of DNA evidence for lowly expressed genes and/or lower-quality libraries. In, we show that increasingFPKM results in higher sensitivity, although with diminishing returns as FPKM approaches 100. The gene inprovides some anecdotal insight into the advantages offered by the ORF graph-based approach. None of the three Cufflinks predictions for this locus matched TAIR10 annotations, and one was on the opposite strand from the annotations. RSVP predictions were on the proper strand; all contained valid ORFs; and RSVP identified several alternative start codons with non-zero read depth. In addition, a Structural Classification of Proteins (SCOP) protein domain involved in heavy metal binding (55 008) occurs in one RSVP isoform but is excluded by another (in agreement with TAIR10 annotations), suggesting the possibility of differential protein function based on isoform; the gene (TAIR10: AT4G16380) is annotated as a heavy metal transporter. Note that Cufflinks was unable to extend its prediction into the zero-depth region from 9 255 608 to 9 255 761; our use of both DNA and RNA evidence allowed RSVP to reproduce the annotated isoform extending across this interval.provides counts of alternative isoform features for Cufflinks and RSVP on the FPKM ! 1 test set as compared with TAIR10 annotations. For all alternative splicing events alternative donor or acceptor splice sites, exon skipping and intron retentionRSVP agrees more closely with TAIR10 than does Cufflinks. In contrast, although prediction of alternative start codons and stop codons by Cufflinks exceeds those in TAIR10 by roughly a factor of three, RSVP predicts substantially more of these events than Cufflinks, particularly in the case of start codons. We suspect the TAIR10 annotations are substantially underrepresenting these events, as human curators are typically trained to choose the single most upstream start codon. Because Cufflinks does not identify a reading frame, we were compelled to identify the longest ORF in its predictions, likely limiting the frequency of alternative translation start sites in its predictions; as such, the elevated number of start codons identified by RSVP may better correlate with the true prevalence of this type of alternative isoform feature. Finally, in, we show the receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curves for the classification task of discriminating annotated coding loci from either putative non-coding genes (lincRNAs) or from unannotated transcribed loci. For coding genes, we used 3888 TAIR10 loci with FPKM ! 1 not in the training set. Classification was performed by thresholding the maximal length-normalized exon score of the RSVP prediction ( RNA 0); note that although the lincRNAs were filtered by Liu et al. based on the longest ORF length, the RSVP exon scores used for classification are likelihood ratios and therefore do not. Example gene (TAIR10: AT4G16380) illustrating differences between Cufflinks and RSVP predictions. None of the three Cufflinks predictions matched the TAIR10 annotations; one was on the opposite strand. RSVP predictions identified several alternative start codons. The gene is a known heavy metal transporter; a putative SCOP domain (oval) involved in metal transport is differentially included by the predicted RSVP isoforms, as well as by the TAIR10 annotationsdirectly use ORF lengths in the classification. The solid curve plots the true-positive rate as a function of false-positive rate in discriminating the annotated coding loci from the putative lincRNAs. This produced an AUC value (area under the ROC curve) of 0.908, indicating that ORF graphs can be used to reliably discriminate coding from non-coding loci. The dashed ROC curve is the result of discriminating (using RSVP) the same set of annotated coding genes from the unannotated transcribed loci identified by Cufflinks (AUC 0.886). In contrast, discrimination between the two sets of putative non-coding loci was poor (AUC 0.520), suggesting that the vast majority of unannotated transcribed loci are non-coding and that few coding genes likely remain to be discovered. See Supplementary Material for additional results.In the case of protein-coding genes, isoforms may differ not only in their splicing patterns but also in their reading frame and length, the latter feature being most obviously affected by the choice of translation start site (start codon). Although human annotators are typically trained to choose the most upstream methionine as the correct start codon (in accordance with the traditional ribosome scanning modele.g.), this is not a biologically absolute rule. Several plant genes have now been shown to support stable translation from multiple start codons , in some cases resulting in differential protein targeting in the cell. Translation initiation will also be constrained by the transcription initiation site, so that shortening of transcripts at the 5 0 end will force the use of more 3 0 translation start sites. The use of alternative translation start sites will obviously affect the encoded protein and, in some instances, may cause the differential inclusion of functional protein domains, in particular signal peptides that influence the subcellular localization of the resulting protein. Therefore, it is valuable for a predictor to be able to identify isoforms differing based on the use of strong alternative start codons. A prominent feature of our proposed framework is the ability to exploit the sensitivity-specificity trade-off inherent in choosing the number of predictions to be made. Although direct measurement of the specificity is generally not possible, because of the incomplete state of most genomic annotation efforts to date, the eventual sharp falloff in the rate of increase of sensitivity as numbers of predictions continue to rise indicates both a likely concomitant drop in specificity and also that a point of saturation has likely been reached for the expressed genes. Plots fromsuggest that current methods based only on RNA evidence may still be missing a substantial fraction of expressed isoforms. The advantage of combining RNA and DNA evidence for protein-coding transcript prediction should be particularly large in the regime of lowly expressed genes or in the presence of highly non-uniform read coverage along a gene (e.g. as might result from sequencing or amplification bias), in which low sequencing coverage over specific parts of genes may leave those exons effectively invisible to conventional transcript assembly algorithms. In contrast, the use of ORF graphs allows one to complete the picture by finding exons with high-coding potential and reasonably strong splice sites that result in a complete ORF, despite gaps in RNA coverage (e.g. the 153 nt interval of zero read depth within the annotated coding exon in, which caused Cufflinks to prematurely terminate its prediction). The use of a probabilistic framework such as ours provides a means of doing so in a seamless principled manner. There are a number of potential improvements to our approach that could be investigated, most prominent among them being the incorporation of additional information. Just as we have shown that integration of DNA and RNA evidence can benefit prediction, so the additional integration of yet other forms of evidence, such as evolutionary conservation, should prove fruitful. Previous and ongoing work in the field of gene prediction consistently shows that combining multiple lines of evidence tends to produce higher-quality gene structure predictions (e.g.), and this very likely extends to the case of predicting multiple isoforms. Additional information derived via the use of specialized RNA library preparation techniques such as paired-end sequencing could in principle be incorporated via appropriate augmentation of the ORF graph; these remain promising avenues for future work. Unlike the approach typically taken in the gene-finding literature, where gene-finding programs are monolithic programs with few independently reusable parts, the use of ORF graphs permits a modular approach to transcript isoform discovery. Just as RSVP uses an independent reweighting step to update the scores decorating the edges of the ORF graph so as to reflect RNA evidence, additional graph transformations could be modularly applied to incorporate additional evidence; the base ORF graph produced by our pipeline may thus be used by other groups to investigate alternative methods of graph-based prediction. Finally, we believe that ORF graphs may prove useful not only as substrates for prediction but also as repositories for later re-annotation in the light of additional evidence, when that evidence becomes available. Their ability to be stored, annotated and decoded efficiently in both space and time renders them a highly useful substrate for an array of possible downstream analyses. 
