Data and text mining Improving peak detection in high-resolution LC/MS metabolomics data using preexisting knowledge and machine learning approach Motivation: Peak detection is a key step in the preprocessing of untargeted metabolomics data generated from high-resolution liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC/MS). The common practice is to use filters with predetermined parameters to select peaks in the LC/MS profile. This rigid approach can cause suboptimal performance when the choice of peak model and parameters do not suit the data characteristics. Results: Here we present a method that learns directly from various data features of the extracted ion chromatograms (EICs) to differentiate between true peak regions from noise regions in the LC/MS profile. It utilizes the knowledge of known metabolites, as well as robust machine learning approaches. Unlike currently available methods, this new approach does not assume a parametric peak shape model and allows maximum flexibility. We demonstrate the superiority of the new approach using real data. Because matching to known me-tabolites entails uncertainties and cannot be considered a gold standard , we also developed a probabilistic receiver-operating characteristic (pROC) approach that can incorporate uncertainties.Metabolomics is becoming a major area of interest in highthroughput biology . Measuring thousands of metabolites at a time, untargeted metabolomics using liquid chromatography coupled with mass spectrometry (LC/MS) helps to unravel systematic response to drugs, detect pollutants in humans, find gene functions and discover disease markers and mechanisms . High-resolution LC/MS platforms generate highly accurate mass-to-charge ratio (m/z) measurements, facilitating metabolite identification . At the same time, the raw data are large and noisy. Complex preprocessing routines are necessary to ensure high-quality peak detection, quantification and alignment across profiles . Critical to the success of data analysis is the detection of peaks from the raw data. A number of methods have been developed, each assuming certain characteristics can differentiate peaks from noise . As examples, the XCMS package uses a matched filter based on the second derivative of the Gaussian function , and the apLCMS package uses a run filter based on point distribution patterns . Currently, peak detection in high-resolution LC/MS data is still less than satisfactory, especially for peaks of lower intensity. A wealth of knowledge exists about common metabolites. Some of them are documented in openly available databases such as the Human Metabolome Database (HMDB) , Madison Metabolomics Consortium Database (MMCD) and Metlin . We have previously developed a hybrid approach utilizing existing knowledge to improve peak detection . While greatly improving the detection rate of known metabolites, as well as peaks consistently detected in historical data, it does not help peaks derived from metabolites that are not yet documented in the database. In this study, we ask the question: can we learn patterns from the part of data that match to known metabolites, such that the knowledge can improve the detection of unknown metabolites? Moreover, each dataset may have different characteristics because of changes in experimental conditions, such as peak width and signal-to-noise ratio. Can the method find the best criterion driven by the data characteristics? To this end, we consider machine learning techniques that are effective in high-dimensional data, as well as resistant to high collinearity in the data. We first separate the data into extracted ion chromatograms (EICs) using adaptive binning . We use EIC to refer to the data slices after binning. Each EIC contains some raw data points, which may or may not be a real peak. We then take a large number of data feature measurements from every EIC. In this article, we shall use data feature to refer to the characteristics of the EIC data, instead of metabolic features detected in the data. Given the data, our ultimate goal is to find a scoring system that best separates EICs that contain real peaks from those that do not contain real peaks. Certainly, such a scoring system cannot be obtained because we do not have the knowledge as to which EICs contain real peaks. However, some of the EICs have m/z values closely matched to known metabolites. Those matched are likely to contain real peaks, whereas those To whom correspondence should be addressed. unmatched have much lower chances to contain real peaks. We hypothesize that by finding a scoring system that best separates the matched/unmatched EICs, we have a good proxy to the ultimate goal of differentiating peak regions from noise. We use machine learning techniques to find the optimal rule to discriminate matched EICs from unmatched EICs, using classification models such as logistic regression, boosting, support vector machine (SVM) and random forest (RF) . After the best model is selected by cross-validation, all the unmatched EICs are given scores based on this model. Higher scores will signify the EIC is more likely to contain a real peak.In this proof-of-concept study, we compared the performance of the new machine learning-based approach with existing methods XCMS and apLCMS . Although apLCMS does have a hybrid approach that involves targeted search of known metabolites , we did not use this option because our purpose was to find whether the new method brought improvement on the detection of previously unknown peaks, on which the hybrid apLCMS does not help. Among the three methods, only the new method requires a list of known metabolites. We first found the unique m/z values of HMDB metabolites and split them in half randomly. The [M + H] + ions of half of the HMDB data were used as the known m/z values for the new method. To avoid the impact of parameter choices, we tried our best to tune the methods and allowed each method a number of parameter settings. The parameters were specific to the datasets. They are described in detail below. To assess the performance of peak detection, we based our judgment on the matching of detected peaks to known metabolites. First, from the results of all three methods, we removed peaks matched to the). The former was a more stringent set, and the latter was a more relaxed set. The number of peaks detected, together with the percentage of detected peaks matched to the known metabolites, gave us measurements of the quality of the peak detection. 
