Structural bioinformatics Improving protein fold recognition and template-based modeling by employing probabilistic-based matching between predicted one-dimensional structural properties of query and corresponding native properties of templates Motivation: In recent years, development of a single-method fold-recognition server lags behind consensus and multiple template techniques. However, a good consensus prediction relies on the accuracy of individual methods. This article reports our efforts to further improve a single-method fold recognition technique called SPARKS by changing the alignment scoring function and incorporating the SPINE-X techniques that make improved prediction of secondary structure, backbone torsion angle and solvent accessible surface area. Results: The new method called SPARKS-X was tested with the SALIGN benchmark for alignment accuracy, Lindahl and SCOP benchmarks for fold recognition, and CASP 9 blind test for structure prediction. The method is compared to several state-of-the-art techniques such as HHPRED and BoostThreader. Results show that SPARKS-X is one of the best single-method fold recognition techniques. We further note that incorporating multiple templates and refinement in model building will likely further improve SPARKS-X. Availability: The method is available as a SPARKS-X server atGiven a query protein sequence with unknown structure, the most reliable structure prediction technique is to recognize its matching structural folds from existing known structures with or without significant sequence similarity (called homology modeling and fold recognition, respectively). This approach is also known as templatebased modeling. Template-based modeling becomes increasingly powerful because most popular structure folds (adopted by multiple sequences) are known . However, recognizing structurally similar folds in the absence of sequence similarity (fold recognition) is challenging, as revealed from the critical assessment of structure prediction (CASP) To whom correspondence should be addressed. techniques. CASP experiments highlighted the importance of posttreatment of models predicted by individual fold recognition methods through the use of consensus predictions [For example, ROBETTA , Pmodeller6 , Fams-ace , Phyre (and/or constrained templatefragment recombination and refinement [For example, Chunk-TASSER , I-TASSER (. The experiments also indicated a convergence of techniques that can be broadly characterized as mixing and matching of multiple fragments and templates . Examples of recently developed new methods include the combined use of fragment and template comparison , non-linear scoring function from conditional random field model and profile entropy , employment of predicted torsion angles and a combined use of profileprofile alignment and pairwise and solvation potentials . We have developed a series of single fold recognition methods (SPARKS, SP 2 , SP 3 , SP 4 and SP 5 ) that are based on weighted matching of multiple profiles that include sequence profiles generated from multiple sequence alignment , predicted versus actual secondary structures , knowledge-based profile (singlebody) score function , depth-dependent sequence profiles derived from template structures , predicted versus actual solvent accessible surface area and predicted versus actual dihedral angles . Statistically significant improvement is observed for the accuracy and sensitivity of fold recognition as the number of matching profiles increases from 3 to 5 . In particular, SPARKS, SP 3 and SP 4 were ranked among the top performers for automatic servers in CASP 6 and CASP 7 experiments. One issue in the methods developed above is that matching predicted 1D profiles of query sequence with actual profiles of templates is based on simple difference matrices. It does not account for the probability of errors in predicted 1D structural properties such as secondary structure, backbone torsion angles and solvent accessible surface area. In this article, we introduce energy termsWe have reported a new fold recognition server called SPARKSX that is significantly different from our previous versions in how the profileprofile matching score is obtained. Moreover, we also employed significantly improved secondary structure prediction, real value torsion angle prediction and solvent accessibility prediction. All these techniques made an improvement over our previous SP series possible. We found that predicted ASA contributes the most to the overall accuracy of SPARKS-X. One interesting observation is that SPAKRS-X performs significantly better in recognizing structurally similar proteins (3) and in building better models (3) based on the large dataset of SCOP-20 and the latest version of HHPRED available on the web. On the other hand, limited CASP 9 blind prediction suggests the opposite. The official average GDT score for 147 domains given by HHPREDB is 59.5, compared with 57.7 given by SPARKS-X (http://predictioncenter.org/casp9). This 3 improvement of HHPRED over SPARKS-X is likely due to significantly more sophisticated model building techniques employed in the unreleased version of HHPRED by using distance restraints derived from multiple templates together with alignment confidence. Furthermore, SPARKS-X is only 8 behind the best automatic server in official average GDT score of Zhang server (62.2). This 8 is likely due to combined effect of consensus prediction from multiple fold recognition servers, the use of multiple templates and model refinement. This is an area of focus in our future work for further improving SPARKS. 
