Improving the TFold test for differential shotgun proteomics We present an updated version of the TFold software for pinpointing differentially expressed proteins in shotgun proteomics experiments. Given an FDR bound, the updated approach uses a theoretical FDR estimator to maximize the number of identifications that satisfy both a fold-change cutoff that varies with the t-test P-value as a power law and a stringency criterion that aims to detect lowly abundant proteins. The new version has yielded significant improvements in sensitivity over the previous one. Availability: Freely available for academic use atOne of the goals of shotgun proteomics is to perform large-scale comparisons of complex protein mixtures (e.g. biological fluids or whole-cell lysates). It comprises protein digestion followed by peptide chromatographic separation online with tandem mass spectrometry (MS2) for protein identification and quantitation. There are several strategies for protein quantitation; examples are metabolic labeling , chemical derivatization and label-free . We previously described PatternLab for Proteomics , a computational environment for analyzing shotgun proteomics data. The modules available in PatternLab serve various purposes, ranging from preparing decoy databases, to selecting and sharing reliable protein identifications , to performing gene ontology analyses , and many more. One of its most popular modules is the TFold test for pinpointing differentially expressed proteins quantitated by any of the above strategies. Briefly, in the previous version a PatternLab file containing protein quantitation data from different biological conditions would first be filtered according to specified t-test P-value and fold-change cutoffs. Then the user would interactively experiment with different fold-change cutoffs, each leading to a different list of proteins through the BH FDR estimator for the same user-specified q-value, henceforth referred to as . This process would ultimately lead to a fold-change cutoff that maximized the number of proteins in the list. Even though this simple strategy has been effective in a number of occasions, imposing a fixed fold-change cutoff could discard To whom correspondence should be addressed. proteins with very low P-values but not satisfying the fold-change cutoff. This seems unreasonable because, in the proteomics scenario, the magnitude of a proteins fold change need not correlate with its biological importance. In fact, molecular abundance is only one of the various factors controlling protein activity, not necessarily the most important one . Here, we describe how we reformulated the TFold test to better address these limitations and increase sensitivity. We also tackle another common problem in proteomics, namely that of dealing with lowly abundant proteins (e.g. those having low spectral counts), which usually turn out to be over-represented in complex mixtures. These proteins are more prone to getting around the barriers imposed by common statistical filters (e.g. the t-test) because they tend to artificially acquire low P-values. To exemplify, assume the following sets of spectral counts for a given protein in two biological conditions: 1, 1, 1 and 5, 6, 5. Notably, in this extreme example, there is a considerable fold change while the P-value is artificially low due to the lack of variation. In our experience, it is much more likely that this protein is a false-positive than another having significantly higher spectral counts but with a higher P-value as well. Our updated TFold approach introduces a method to quickly highlight (and separate) proteins such as the one here exemplified. For these proteins, additional experimentation is recommended before ascertaining their status as differentially expressed.The effectiveness of our updated algorithm is exemplified on the data set provided bycomparing A172 cancer cells to those (A172R) resistant to Perillyl Alcohol (POH), a naturally occurring chemotherapeutic agent that induces apoptosis. The authors provide a list of protein identifications quantitated by spectral counting and satisfying a 1 FDR for their identifications according to DTASelect . In the original analysis, the authors converged to a fixed fold-change cutoff of 2.5, resulting in 57 differentially expressed proteins for a P-value cutoff of 0.01 and = 0.01. The new algorithm converged to z = 0.14, pinpointing 77 differentially expressed proteins for the same , plus six proteins satisfying the same criteria but reported in a separate list as having been marked by the L-stringency filter, thus suggesting the need for further experimentation.is a snapshot of Pattern Labs graphical user interface during analysis. An example of a protein that was only marked as differentially expressed by the revised method is glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH; IPI00219018.7). Identifying this protein is important because we hypothesize that it could be related to the initiation of apoptosis when the cells medium contains POH. The sets of spectral counts for this protein were 117, 71, 141 for the wild-type and 271, 255, 240 for the resistant cell culture, but further discussions on any of the corresponding biological interpretations are beyond the scope of this manuscript. 
