A method for de novo nucleic acid diagnostic target discovery Motivation: A proper target or marker is essential in any diagnosis (e.g. an infection or cancer). An ideal diagnostic target should be both conserved in and unique to the pathogen. Currently, these targets can only be identified manually, which is time-consuming and usually error-prone. Because of the increasingly frequent occurrences of emerging epidemics and multidrug-resistant superbugs, a rapid diagnostic target identification process is needed. Results: A new method that can identify uniquely conserved regions (UCRs) as candidate diagnostic targets for a selected group of organisms solely from their genomic sequences has been developed and successfully tested. Using a sequence-indexing algorithm to identify UCRs and a k-mer integer-mapping model for computational efficiency , this method has successfully identified UCRs within the bacteria domain for 15 test groups, including pathogenic, probiotic, commensal and extremophilic bacterial species or strains. Based on the identified UCRs, new diagnostic primer sets were designed, and their specificity and efficiency were tested by polymerase chain reaction amplifications from both pure isolates and samples containing mixed cultures. Availability and implementation: The UCRs identified for the 15 bacterial species are now freely available at http://ucr.synblex.com. The source code of the programs used in this study is accessible atFinding the proper target or marker for a specific disease (e.g. an infection or cancer) is essential for its successful diagnosis. An ideal candidate region must be both conserved in and unique to the specific target (e.g. a pathogen species or strain), i.e. a uniquely conserved region, to ensure specific and effective detection. Target-specific nucleic acid diagnostic methods, including hybridization, amplification and sequencing, have been widely used in academia and in health care, food safety and biosecurity industries . Specific yet sensitive oligonucleotides (probes or primers) are essential to all of these assays. Current tools, such as Primer3 and Primer-BLAST , can only facilitate probe or primer design when a candidate region is provided, but are not able to identify these candidate regions by themselves. So far, no existing tools can identify these candidate regions de novo, and these candidate targets can only be selected manually, usually based on the pathogens known properties, such as secreted toxins or genes involved in its pathogenesis . This process is time-consuming and usually error-prone, as the proposed detection primers must be thoroughly examined to ensure that they are universally present within the targeted group (e.g. a pathogenic species or strain) and to rule out high similarity matches in unintended groups. More pressingly, the number of emerging epidemics and cases with multidrugresistant pathogens has continued to increase in recent years . Early and accurate diagnosis is crucial in these cases, which often necessitate a rapid diagnostic test development. As a result, methods that can automatically identify these candidate regions within a reasonable time frame and have an affordable cost are desirable.A total of 2717 bacterial genomes were obtained from the NCBI nucleotide database in December 2013. Because of the high probability of horizontal gene transfer for plasmids, only genomic DNA was included. The k-mer length was selected as 18, which can produce UCR k-mers that may be directly used as primers while at the same time maintaining a manageable index size (6.9 10 10 ). The background 18-mer occurrence index was computed, costing $200 CPU-h (2.4 GHz), and the total uncompressed size was 137 GB. These 18-mer occurrences were largely uniformly distributed across the mapped integer space. Close to 90 of the 18-mers did not exist in the known bacterial genomes, and among those that did exist, only 490 had no more than five occurrences . This indicates that the bacterial 18-mer space is unsaturated, which means that there are many potential UCR 18-mers.The UCR identification method described here was able to successfully and automatically, with reasonable efficiency, identify regions that are both conserved in and unique to a selected bacterial group (a species or strain) solely based on their genomic sequences. These regions are by definition ideal diagnostic targets for nucleic acid hybridization, amplification and/or sequencing. Although high-throughput sequencing has been used in major medical centers to identify and track emerging epidemics and multidrug-resistant bacterial infections , most medical facilities and reference laboratories lack the necessary equipment or personnel to take full advantage of these latest technologies. However, with this method, effective and accurate nucleic acid diagnostic targets could be rapidly identified from the data generated at those major medical centers or government agencies, and can be quickly adopted by most hospitals and laboratories with existing procedures such as PCR.The UCRs identified for the 15 bacterial species are now freely available at http://ucr.synblex.com. The source code of the programs used in this study is accessible at http://ucr.synblex.com/ bacterialIdSourceCode.d.zip, while an automated pipeline for diagnostic target and primer selection is under development. Hopefully, this new method could rapidly and efficiently generate diagnostic targets that are both specific and sensitive, and ultimately lead to improved bacterial infectious disease management. 
