Structural bioinformatics Inclusion of dyad-repeat pattern improves topology prediction of transmembrane b-barrel proteins Accurate topology prediction of transmembrane b-barrels is still an open question. Here, we present BOCTOPUS2, an improved topology prediction method for transmembrane b-barrels that can also identify the barrel domain, predict the topology and identify the orientation of residues in transmembrane b-strands. The major novelty of BOCTOPUS2 is the use of the dyad-repeat pattern of lipid and pore facing residues observed in transmembrane b-barrels. In a cross-validation test on a benchmark set of 42 proteins, BOCTOPUS2 predicts the correct topology in 69 of the proteins, an improvement of more than 10 over the best earlier method (BOCTOPUS) and in addition, it produces significantly fewer erroneous predictions on non-transmembrane b-barrel proteins. Availability and implementation: BOCTOPUS2 webserver along with full dataset and source codeTransmembrane b-barrels (TMBs) are located in the outer membranes of bacteria, chloroplasts and mitochondria and are involved in transport of substrates across the cell membrane. Also, they are key components of translocation complexes. Bacterial TMBs consist of an even number of anti-parallel b-strands that are surrounded by long outer-loops and short inner-loops. Eukaryotic TMBs can have an odd number of strands. The residues located in transmembrane b-strands follow a dyad-repeat pattern, where alternating residues face the lipids and the pore region , respectively. BOCTOPUS , a previously published two-stage TMB topology predictor, did not predict the lipid/pore-facing orientation of residues in the transmembrane b-strands but BOCTOPUS2 does. The use of this information improves topology predictions.BOCTOPUS2 predicts the correct topology for 29 proteins out of 42 (69) proteins . This is better than other methods and, in addition, the performances of all earlier methods are possibly overestimated as some of the 42 proteins have been used in their training sets (Supplementary Information). One main reason for the improved results is that the filter in BOCTOPUS2 avoids incorrect prediction of strands in the non-barrel region. This filter also aids discrimination between TMBs and non-TMBs. In a dataset of 7558 non-TMBs and 370 TMBs BOCTOPUS2 predicts three or more strands in 81 of the TMBs at a specificity of 98.9 (Supplementary). Amongst the methods tested here, only HHomp and BETAWARE have a higher Mathews correlation coefficient (MCC) for barrel/ non-barrel discrimination (Supplementary). The detection of eukaryotic TMBs seems to be more difficult as BOCTOPUS2 only detects 10 out of 28, possibly due to different evolutionary origins (Supplementary Table S2).Comparison of topology prediction methods. Topology-Number of proteins with the correct topology. TM Number of proteins with correct number of predicted strands. SOV is the segment overlap , Q2 is the two-state (membrane/not-membrane) prediction accuracy and Q3 is the three-state (membrane, inner-loop, outer-loop) prediction accuracy. Q4, the four state (lipid-facing, pore-facing, inner-loop, outer-loop) accuracy for BOCTOPUS2 is 89. BOCTOPUS2 results are cross-validated while all other methods have included some of the 42 proteins in their training set. The two last columns TPR and FPR describe the true and false positive rate in the discrimination dataset. BOCTOPUS , profTMB , PRED-TMBB , BETAWARE , HHomp and F-W b-barrel Analyzer results were obtained using standalone versions. We present BOCTOPUS2, an improved topology predictor for TMBs that exploits the dyad-repeat feature of bacterial TMBs to identify transmembrane b-strands. BOCTOPUS2 can also identify the transmembrane barrel domain in long sequences and predict the correct topology in $69 proteins in our dataset. Further, BOCTOPUS2 predicts the lipid-facing or pore-facing status of residues in identified b-strands. We have recently shown that accurate topology and residue-orientation prediction is beneficial for 3D modelling of TMBs . 
