Inference of patient-specific pathway activities from multi-dimensional cancer genomics data using PARADIGM Motivation: High-throughput data is providing a comprehensive view of the molecular changes in cancer tissues. New technologies allow for the simultaneous genome-wide assay of the state of genome copy number variation, gene expression, DNA methylation and epigenetics of tumor samples and cancer cell lines. Analyses of current data sets find that genetic alterations between patients can differ but often involve common pathways. It is therefore critical to identify relevant pathways involved in cancer progression and detect how they are altered in different patients. Results: We present a novel method for inferring patient-specific genetic activities incorporating curated pathway interactions among genes. A gene is modeled by a factor graph as a set of interconnected variables encoding the expression and known activity of a gene and its products, allowing the incorporation of many types of omic data as evidence. The method predicts the degree to which a pathways activities (e.g. internal gene states, interactions or high-level outputs) are altered in the patient using probabilistic inference. Compared with a competing pathway activity inference approach called SPIA, our method identifies altered activities in cancer-related pathways with fewer false-positives in both a glioblastoma multiform (GBM) and a breast cancer dataset. PARADIGM identified consistent pathway-level activities for subsets of the GBM patients that are overlooked when genes are considered in isolation. Further, grouping GBM patients based on their significant pathway perturbations divides them into clinically-relevant subgroups having significantly different survival outcomes. These findings suggest that therapeutics might be chosen that target genes at critical points in the commonly perturbed pathway(s) of a group of patients. Availability: Source code available atA central premise in modern cancer treatment is that patient diagnosis, prognosis, risk assessment and treatment response prediction can be improved by stratification of cancers based on genomic, transcriptional and epigenomic characteristics of the tumor alongside relevant clinical information gathered at the time of diagnosis (e.g. patient history, tumor histology and stage) as well as subsequent clinical follow-up data (e.g. treatment regimens To whom correspondence should be addressed. The authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the first two authors should be regarded as joint First authors. and disease recurrence events). While several high-throughput technologies have been available for probing the molecular details of cancer, only a handful of successes have been achieved based on this paradigm. For example, 25 of breast cancer patients presenting with a particular amplification or overexpression of the ERBB2 growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase can now be treated with trastuzumab, a monoclonal antibody targeting the receptor . However, even this success story is clouded by the fact that 50 of patients with ERBB2-positive breast cancers actually achieve any therapeutic benefit from trastuzumab, emphasizing our incomplete understanding of this well-studied oncogenic pathway and the many therapeutic-resistant mechanisms intrinsic to ERBB2positive breast cancers . This overall failure to translate modern advances in basic cancer biology is in part due to our inability to comprehensively organize and integrate all of the omic features now technically acquirable on virtually any type of cancer. Despite overwhelming evidence that histologically similar cancers are in reality a composite of many molecular subtypes, each with significantly different clinical behavior, this knowledge is rarely applied in practice due to the lack of robust signatures that correlate well with prognosis and treatment options. Cancer is a disease of the genome that is associated with aberrant alterations that lead to disregulation of the cellular system. What is not clear is how genomic changes feed into genetic pathways that underlie cancer phenotypes. High-throughput functional genomics investigations have made tremendous progress in the past decade . However, the challenges of integrating multiple data sources to identify reproducible and interpretable molecular signatures of tumorigenesis and progression remain elusive. Recent pilot studies by TCGA and others make it clear that a pathway-level understanding of genomic perturbations is needed to understand the changes observed in cancer cells. These findings demonstrate that even when patients harbor genomic alterations or aberrant expression in different genes, these genes often participate in a common pathway. In addition, and even more striking, is that the alterations observed (e.g. deletions versus amplifications) often alter the pathway output in the same direction, either all increasing or all decreasing the pathway activation. Approaches for interpreting genome-wide cancer data have focused on identifying gene expression profiles that are highly correlated with a particular phenotype or disease state, and have led to promising results . Methods using analysis of variance , false-discovery and non-parametric methods have been proposed.Page: i238 i237i245To assess the quality of the EM training procedure, we compared the convergence of EM using the actual patient data relative to a null dataset in which tuples of gene expression and copy number (E,C) were permuted across the genes and patients. As expected, PARADIGM converged much more quickly on the true dataset relative to the null. As an example, we plotted the IPAs for the gene AKT1 as a function of the EM iteration . One can see that the activities quickly converge in the first couple of iterations. EM quickly converged to an activated level when trained with the actual patient data, whereas it converged to an unchanged activity when given random data. The convergence suggests that the pathway structures and inference are able to successfully identify patterns of activity in the integrated patient data. We next ran PARADIGM on both breast cancer and GBM cohorts. We developed a statistical simulation procedure to determine which IPAs are significantly different than what would be expected from a negative distribution. We constructed the negative distribution by permuting across all of the patients and across the genes in the pathway. Empirically, we found that permuting only among genes. Distinguishing decoy from real pathways with PARADIGM and SPIA. Decoy pathways were created by assigning a new gene name to each gene in a pathway. PARADIGM and SPIA were then used to compute the perturbation of every pathway. Each line shows the receiveroperator characteristic for distinguishing real from decoy pathways using the perturbation ranking. In breast cancer, the areas under the curve (AUCs) are 0.669 and 0.602 for PARADIGM and SPIA, respectively. In GBM, the AUCs are 0.642 and 0.604, respectively. in the pathway was necessary to help correct for the fact that each gene has a different topological context determined by the network. In the breast cancer dataset, 56 172 IPAs (7 of the total) were found to be significantly higher or lower than the matched negative controls. On average, NCI pathways had 497 significant entities per patient and 103 out of 127 pathways had at least one entity altered in 20 or more of the patients. In the GBM dataset, 141 682 IPAs (9 of the total) were found to be significantly higher or lower than the matched negative controls. On average, NCI pathways had 616 significant entities per patient and 110 out of 127 pathways had at least one entity altered in 20 or more of the patients. As another control, we asked whether the integrated activities could be obtained from arbitrary genes connected in the same way as the genes in the NCI pathways. To do this, we estimated the false discovery rate and compared it with SPIA . Because many genetic networks have been found to be implicated in cancer, we chose to use simulated decoy pathways as a set of negative controls. For each NCI pathway, we constructed a decoy pathway by connecting random genes in the genome together using the same network structure as the NCI pathway. We then ran PARADIGM and SPIA to derive IPAs for both the NCI and decoy pathways. For PARADIGM, we ranked each pathway by the number of IPAs found to be significant across the patients after normalizing by the pathway size. For SPIA, pathways were ranked according to their computed impact factor. We found that PARADIGM excludes more decoy pathways from the top-most activated pathways compared with SPIA . For example, in breast cancer, PARADIGM ranks 1 decoy in the top 10, 2 in the top 30 and 4 in the top 50. In comparison, SPIA ranks 3 decoys in the top 10, 12 in the top 30 and 22 in the top 50. The overall distribution of ranks for NCI IPAs are higher in PARADIGM than in SPIA, observed by plotting the cumulative distribution of the ranks (P 0.009, KolmogorovSmirnov test). We sorted the NCI pathways according to their average number of significant IPAs per entity detected by our permutation analysis and tabulated the top 15 in breast cancer and GBM .Several pathways among the top 15 have been previously implicated in their respective cancers. In breast cancer, both SPIA and PARADIGM were able to detect the estrogen-and ErbB2-related pathways. In a recent major meta-analysis study, authors fromfound that estrogen receptor and ErbB2 status were two of only three key prognostic signatures in breast cancer. PARADIGM was also able to identify an AKT1-related PI3K signaling pathway as the top-most pathway with significant IPAs in several samples . The anti-apoptotic AKT1 serinethreonine kinase is known to be involved in breast cancer and interacts with the ERBB2 pathway . In GBM, both FOXM1 and HIF1-alpha transcription factor networks have been studied extensively and shown to be overexpressed in high-grade glioblastomas versus lower-grade gliomas .For each node, ER status, IPAs, expression data and copy-number data are displayed as concentric circles, from innermost to outermost, respectively. The apoptosis node and the ErbB2/ErbB3/neuregulin 2 complex node have circles only for ER status and for IPAs, as there are no direct observations of these entities. Each patients data is displayed along one angle from the circle center to edge.The PARADIGM method integrates diverse high-throughput genomics information with known signaling pathways to provide patient-specific genomic inferences on the state of gene activities, complexes and cellular processes. The core of the method uses a factor graph to leverage inference for combining the various data sources. The use of such inferences in place of, or in conjunction with, the original high-throughput datasets improves our ability to classify samples into clinically relevant subtypes. Clustering the GBM patients based on the PARADIGM-integrated activities revealed patient subtypes correlated with different survival profiles. In contrast, clustering the samples either using the expression data or the copy-number data did not reveal any significant clusters in the dataset. PARADIGM produces pathway inferences of significantly altered gene activities in tumor samples from both GBM and breast cancer. Compared to a competing pathway activity inference approach called SPIA, our method identifies altered activities in cancer-related pathways with fewer false-positives. For computational efficiency, PARADIGM currently uses the NCI pathways as is. While it infers hidden quantities using EM, it makes no attempt to infer new interactions not already present in an NCI pathway. One can imagine expanding the approach to introduce new interactions that increase the likelihood function. While this problem is intractable in general, heuristics such as structural EM can be used to identify interactions using computational search strategies. Rather than searching for novel connections de novo one could speed up the search significantly by proposing interactions derived from proteinprotein interaction maps or gene pairs correlated in a significant number of expression datasets. The power of the pathway-based approach is that it may provide clues about the possible mechanisms underlying the differences in observed survival. Informative IPAs may be useful for suggesting therapeutic targets or to select the most appropriate patients for clinical trials. For example, the ErbB2 amplification is a wellknown marker of particular forms of breast cancer that are treatable by the drug trastuzumab. However, some patients with the ErbB2 amplification have tumors that are refractory to treatment. Inspection of a CircleMap display could identify patients with ErbB2 amplifications but have either inactive or unchanged IPAs as inferred by PARADIGM. Patients harboring the ErbB2 amplification but without predicted activity could be considered for alternative treatment. As more multidimensional datasets become available in the future, it will be interesting to test whether such pathway inferences provide robust biomarkers that generalize across cohorts. 
