Influence maximization in time bounded network identifies transcription factors regulating perturbed pathways Motivation: To understand the dynamic nature of the biological process, it is crucial to identify perturbed pathways in an altered environment and also to infer regulators that trigger the response. Current time-series analysis methods, however, are not powerful enough to identify perturbed pathways and regulators simultaneously. Widely used methods include methods to determine gene sets such as differentially expressed genes or gene clusters and these genes sets need to be further interpreted in terms of biological pathways using other tools. Most pathway analysis methods are not designed for time series data and they do not consider gene-gene influence on the time dimension. Results: In this article, we propose a novel time-series analysis method TimeTP for determining transcription factors (TFs) regulating pathway perturbation, which narrows the focus to perturbed sub-pathways and utilizes the gene regulatory network and proteinprotein interaction network to locate TFs triggering the perturbation. TimeTP first identifies perturbed sub-pathways that propagate the expression changes along the time. Starting points of the perturbed sub-pathways are mapped into the network and the most influential TFs are determined by influence maximization technique. The analysis result is visually summarized in TF-Pathway map in time clock. TimeTP was applied to PIK3CA knock-in dataset and found significant sub-pathways and their regulators relevant to the PIP3 signaling pathway. Availability and Implementation: TimeTP is implemented in Python and available at http://bio health.snu.ac.kr/software/TimeTP/.Our goal in this article is to develop a computational method to perform analysis of time series transcriptome data in terms of biological pathways and also to determine regulators for differentially expressed gene (DEG) sets or perturbed pathways. Analyzing transcriptome data can be done in many different ways for different purposes. Thus there are numerous computational methods and we begin by surveying the literature in the categories such as (i) methods for determining perturbed pathways, (ii) methods for analyzing time series transcriptome data, (iii) methods for the pathway based analysis of time series data and (iv) methods for identifying regulators while analyzing time series data.Analysis of time-series omics data is very difficult and there are only a few tools available . In addition, it is desirable to identify regulators such as TF that are likely to induce changes in transcriptome over time. However, on top of the complexity of analyzing time series data, considering regulators such as TF makes the complexity of the time series data analysis task dramatically high. In this study, we propose a novel bioinformatics method for analyzing time series omics data to identify both perturbed pathways and regulating TFs. Two main ideas are: i. We start the analysis by identifying perturbed pathways in comparison of control vs. treatment group and then focusing on TFs that are relevant to the perturbed pathways. In this way, much smaller number of TFs and pathways are considered, thus the complexity of the analysis task is significantly reduced. ii. To systematically analyze the effect of TFs over time, we adopt and further develop the influence maximization technique in the bounded time.With these two main ideas, we designed and implemented a time-series analysis method of finding TFs regulating perturbed subpathways (TimeTP). The key properties of TimeTP are as follows.(i) TimeTP identifies perturbed sub-pathways that propagate their expression levels along time and also identifies TFs triggering that pathway perturbation by our four-step approach. (ii) TimeTP adopts two well-established computational methods, crosscorrelation and influence maximization , from the fields of signal processing and social network.(iii) The novel framework of TimeTP produces the TF-Pathway map in time clock to trace the pathway perturbation triggered from TF to pathway. As well as the effective visualization of TF-Pathway map, TimeTP provides user-friendly interface by handling a diverse range of input data in terms of type of dataset (RNA-seq or microarray) and type of condition (single time-series or control-treatment). The rest of the article is organized as follows. The process of perturbed sub-pathway mining in TimeTP will be described in Sections 2.12.3. Sections 2.4 and 2.5 explain the time bounded network construction and the influence maximization algorithm for finding TFs. TimeTP is tested by using the biological dataset and the result is compared with other pathway/sub-pathway mining tools and regulator analysis algorithms in Section 3.TimeTP is tested with a genome-wide RNA-seq dataset of nontransformed human breast epithelial cells MCF10a starved overnight and stimulated with 10 ng/ml EGF for 15, 40, 90, 180 and 300 min , in WT and PIK3CA knock-in samples. To test the power of influence maximization, we need to choose datasets with many time points and also with sequencing data to accurately model influence of TFs. Note that many datasets with onlyProfitv=lenInfSett; G 0 8: end for 9: end for 10: newSeed t 2 T with maximum Inf t=Round 11: S S [ fnewSeedg 12: SeedInfSet SeedInfSet [ InfSetnewSeed 13: T TnfnewSeedg 14: end for Influence maximization in time bounded network i131 two time points are not meaningful for this analysis. In addition, to test the performance of the proposed approach, data should have replicates to determine differential expression accurately and the interval between time points should be short to model signaling effects. The MCF10a data were the only one to meet the criteria. PIK3CA knock-in samples (referred to as PIK3CA H1047R) contains a mutated gene that encodes the p110a catalytic subunit (PIK3CA). PIK3CA is a component gene of Class IA phosphoinositide-3-kinases (PI3Ks) and the mutated form of PIK3CA is expected to exhibit chronic activation of phosphatidylinositol (3,4,5)-trisphosphate (PIP3) signaling. PI3K/PIP3 signaling pathway plays a key role in cell growth and migration. In addition, several driver mutations in PI3K/PIP3 pathway have been found in multiple types of cancer. Especially, oncogenic mutations of PIK3CA gene are discovered in up to 45 of human breast cancer samples . Thus, this experiment is designed to trigger long-term activation of PIP3 signaling by the modification of PIK3CA and track its downstream effect. Analysis result of TimeTP is composed of the TF-Pathway map in time clock and the whole list of perturbed pathways as shown inandis the map of influence path from the TFs selected by the influence maximization algorithm to perturbed sub-pathways. Pathways perturbed but not affected by TFs are excluded in the TFPathway map. For example, TimeTP detected perturbation of the PI3K-Akt signaling pathway but it was not included the TF-Pathway map in time clock because PI3K-Akt signaling pathway is directly activated by the modification of PIK3CA in the experiment. As in, FOXO4 is on the top of the TF-Pathway map and propagates its effect to all of the downstream pathways and FoxO signaling pathway itself. The forkhead box O (FoxO) TFs are known as targets of the serine/threonine protein kinases (PKB)/Akt that is directly affected by PIP3 generation . Specifically, Akt inhibits FoxOs and causes consequent inactivation of FoxO signaling pathway, which can be clearly shown in the TF-Pathway map of PIK3CA H1047R samples. Wnt signaling pathway is one of the activated pathways in PIK3CA H1047R samples. TimeTP estimated that differential expression of the TF FOXO4 and SREBF1 in the early time points (13) is propagated through the path and activated Wnt signaling. Although the first gene GSK3B of the perturbed sub-pathway is down-regulated, consequently it made CTNNB1 that encodes b-catenin activated to further transduce the signal to other cytoplasmic regions or into the nucleus. Interaction of FoxOs with b-catenin has an inhibitory effect on b-catenin activity , while TimeTP inferred a devious route that has the same consequence. As for the cooperation between PI3K-Akt signaling and Wnt signaling, several studies provide the logical underpinnings . The activation process of ErbB signaling pathway and Regulation of actin cytoskeleton is more complicated. Albeit both perturbed subpathways themselves are seemingly down-regulated first, the path from TF to the first genes of the sub-pathway (ACTB, ACTG1, HBEGF) is activated and finally three genes are activated in the last time point, forecasting the late activation of two pathways beyond the observed time points. As in the previous studies , ErbB signaling pathway encompasses the PI3K-Akt signaling pathway. The perturbed sub-pathway that TimeTP detected in the ErbB signaling pathway includes the cell surface receptor EGFR, which is the upstream part of PI3K-Akt pathway. Taken together, the effect of Akt signaling activation attributes the delayed activation of the ErbB signaling, which can be the positive feedback loop of the Akt signaling pathway. Detection of a transcriptional feedback loop of PIP3 signaling is the major contribution of the original article of the dataset and the analysis result of TimeTP can be a parallel contribution of the study. Moreover, TF-Pathway path to the Regulation of actin cytoskeleton pathway found in TimeTP result suggests for further research in addition to the previously suggested path . Fc gamma-R mediated phagocytosis is one of the activated pathways in PIK3CA knock-in samples. Mammary epithelial cells can act as phagocytes . During phagocytosis, ligated Fc gamma-R on plasma membranes induces recruitment of PI3K and increased synthesis of PIP3 . TimeTP found the perturbation of phagocytosis pathway starting from PI3K receptor and its downstream genes. One of the TFs expected to trigger the perturbation is ATF3 down-regulated in the early time points, which is a key regulator that inhibits the immune response of macrophage . Our analysis correctly suggested that ATF3 would function similarly in MCF10a cells. TimeTP detected the same sub-pathway in Oocyte meiosis and Oxytoxin signaling. In both pathways, Calcium/calmodulin (CALM) signaling pathway is included and its sub-pathway was found as perturbed. Previous studies of mammary carcinoma cells report that calmodulin mediates Akt activity , suggesting that the increased PIP3 not only recruited Akt by itself but also induced calmodulin-dependent activation of Akt signaling pathway.We presented TimeTP, a four-step approach to locate perturbed sub-pathways and their regulators from time-series transcriptome data. TimeTP has two novel contributions: estimation of delay between two expression vectors that leads to the construction of a time bounded sub-graph, and introduction of the influence maximization technique into the analysis of times series data in search of TFs that are involved in perturbed pathways. TimeTP is the firstsub-pathway mining tool for time-series data that analyzes and visualizes the explicit expression pattern, providing a holistic picture of the pathway perturbation dynamics. In particular, TF-Pathway map in time clock enables user to navigate the perturbation propagation route along time. Analysis of the PIK3CA knock-in dataset shows that TimeTP can capture the perturbation in PI3K-Akt signaling, confirming the main objective of the biological experiment and re-producing consequent changes in the downstream pathways. Especially, FOXO4 is expected to be the master regulator of the perturbation of five pathways in TF-Pathway map, which is in an agreement with the fact that FoxO TFs are the known targets of Akt. As well as the perturbation in FoxO and Wnt signaling pathway directly affected by FoxOs, TimeTP suggests the late activation of ErbB pathway that highlights the same assumption of previous study, a positive feedback loop of the Akt signaling. In addition, TFs predicted and ranked by TimeTP include three important TFs from the original article of the dataset while MRA or DREM failed to discover any TF in the list. TimeTP supports various types of dataset with flexible parameters that can be adjusted for the search of regulators. We believe that TimeTP will be a very valuable tool to identify both perturbed pathways and their regulators, especially in analysis of time series sequencing data. 
