Structural bioinformatics Information-theoretic analysis and prediction of protein atomic burials: on the search for an informational intermediate between sequence and structure Motivation: It has been recently suggested that atomic burials, as expressed by molecular central distances, contain sufficient information to determine the tertiary structure of small globular proteins. A possible approach to structural determination from sequence could therefore involve a sequence-to-burial intermediate prediction step whose accuracy, however, is theoretically limited by the mutual information between these two variables. We use a non-redundant set of globular protein structures to estimate the mutual information between local amino acid sequence and atomic burials. Discretizing central distances of C or C atoms in equiprobable burial levels, we estimate relevant mutual information measures that are compared with actual predictions obtained from a Naive Bayesian Classifier (NBC) and a Hidden Markov Model (HMM). Results: Mutual information density for 20 amino acids and two or three burial levels were estimated to be roughly 15 of the unconditional burial entropy density. Lower estimates for the mutual information between local amino acid sequence and burial of a single residue indicated an increase in mutual information with the number of burial levels up to at least five or six levels. Prediction schemes were found to efficiently extract the available burial information from local sequence. Lower estimates for the mutual information involving single burials are consistently approached by predictions from the NBC and actually surpassed by predictions from the HMM. Near-optimal prediction for the HMM is indicated by the agreement between its density of prediction information and the corresponding density of mutual information between input and output representations. Availability: The dataset of protein structures and the prediction implementations are available at http://www.btc.unb.br/ (in Software).It has been a common statement in biology that amino acid sequences contain sufficient information to determine protein tertiary structures. Fulfilment of the implied possibility of structure prediction from sequence is actually considered one of the most important unsolved problems of molecular biophysics, as reviewed by different groups . Such an intrinsically informational assertion, however, has only more recently been extensively investigated within the context of Shannons information theory. Although informational concepts have been used in algorithms for secondary structure prediction from local sequence since the 70s , for example, the limit imposed on prediction by the mutual information between these two quantities was estimated only a few years ago . Incidentally, an informational analysis of backbone dihedral angles has also exposed the unfeasibility of tertiary structure determination from an even perfect three-state secondary structure prediction . The recurrent utilization of statistical potentials in computational biology has also been interpreted explicitly in informational terms . A particularly relevant example is the analysis of pairwise contact potentials, which revealed a surprisingly modest mutual information between contact partners . General distance constraints have also been investigated, at least in the context of minimalist protein models . Contrasting with secondary structure, atomic burials appear to encode sufficient information for structural determination. Contrasting with pairwise contacts, they have a much better chance of being adequately estimated from sequence information. Monte Carlo simulations of geometrically realistic protein models using native burial information, as expressed by atomic distances from the molecular center, have successfully recovered the tertiary structure of small globular proteins (Pereira). A simple computational experiment combining Molecular Dynamics of similar models with discretized burial levels has additionally provided an upper bound for the amount of required burial information. It actually turned out to be comparable to, and therefore encodable by, the information (entropy) of local protein sequences (Pereira de Araujo). The observed discriminatory difference between To whom correspondence should be addressed.The dependence on N of the estimates for mutual information between N-blocks of burials and central residue identities, IQ 0 ; B N , is shown infor two and three levels of C burials. Analogous results for C burials are shown in the Supplementary Information. Mutual information density, iQ; B IQ 0 ; B 1 , was obtained by extrapolation from exponential or sigmoidal fits to the points before saturation, as indicated by solid lines and shown infor 20 amino acid letters and different numbers of burial levels of C atoms. Positional mutual information is essentially 0 for burial and identity pairs separated by more than 15 residues. We therefore use the sum P N i1 IQ i ; B 0 with N 31 as a reasonable approximation ofwhich, as indicated in the Supplementary Information, is expected to be a lower bound for IQ 1 ; B 0 . We were also able to explore the effect of many burial levels on IQ 1 ; B 0 . As shown in, IQ 1 ; B 0 for C increases significantly from two layers to five layers, approximately from 0.13 to 0.18 bit, but only slightly for additional layers with asymptotic limit close to 0.2 bit. Qualitatively similar results were obtained for C atoms but mutual information between single burials and local sequence tends again to be smaller in this case when compared with C atoms, although the difference is smaller than for mutual information density, as also seen in. We also show for comparison in the same table the mutual information between single letters, I(Q; B). The performance of two-layer C burial prediction is summarized in. Analogous results for C burials are shown in the Supplementary Information. Prediction accuracy, A (a,b), and prediction information, I p (c,d), as determined byEquations (S9) and (S10) of the Supplementary Information, are plotted as a function of window size for the NBC (a,c) and as a function of fragment size for the HMM (b,d). In addition to the complete alphabet of 20 amino acids, tests were also performed using the HP and HPN-reduced alphabets. For the NBC, we report results for the simpler variation provided by Equation (S4) of the Supplementary Information, NBC1 (non-shaded symbols), and also for the variation using positional probabilities conditional to central residue identity, as provided by Equation (S5) of the Supplementary Information, NBC2 (shaded symbols). Both accuracy and information increase significantly as the window grows from one to nine residues, but not perceptibly for longer windows. Overall performance is higher for C than for C atoms. For 20 amino acids, accuracy increases from $61 to above 65 for C atoms and from around 63 to above 66 for C. These few percentage points in accuracy improvement actually correspond to around 100 increase in prediction information, from around 4 to above 10 centibits andthe mutual information, IQ 0 ; B N , between a single central amino acid identity, Q 0 , and N-blocks of burials, B N , as a function of block size N, for two (a) and three (b) levels of C burials. Different sets of points correspond to different alphabets of amino acid identities. Lines represent exponential or sigmoidal fits to the data before saturation from which limiting values iQ; B IQ 0 ; B 1 are obtained. Saturation for L 2 occurs at N 11 and is not perceived in the displayed range, while for L 3 it occurs N 8, as observed in (b). Analogous results for C burials are shown in the Supplementary InformationMutual information between single letters, I(Q; B) in bits, mutual information density, i(Q; B) in bits/pair, as obtained inand Supplementary Information, and the lower estimate for the mutual information between single burial and local sequence of identities, IQ 1 ; B 0 , as obtained in, for C and C atoms are shown for different combinations of identity alphabet and number of burial layers, as indicated in the first two columns. Error in the last significant digit is shown in parentheses.Letter entropy, H(X), and mutual information between adjacent letters, IX i ; X i1 , are in bits. Entropy density h(X), in bits/letter, and corresponding excess entropy E X , in bits, were obtained from data fits shown inor in the Supplementary Information. Each line corresponds to a different alphabet of amino acid identities or burials, as indicated in the first column. Error in the last significant digit is shown in parentheses. from around 6 to above 11 centibits for C and C , respectively, for NBC1. Further improvement provided by NBC2, although hardly perceptible in the accuracy measure, is consistently observed for prediction information, accounting for more than 1 centibit of additional information for 20 amino acids while sampling error is of the order of millibits. For the HP and HPN alphabets, both NBC1 and NBC2 predictions agree, within sampling error, with the corresponding lower limits provided by IQ 1 ; B 0 while for 20 amino acids this is the case for NBC2. For the HMM, tested fragment lengths ranged from 3 to 9, but some configurations could not be tested due to hardware constraints related to computer memory usage with many hidden variables. It is clear in the plots ofand d that the fragment length has a direct correlation with the quality of results for HMM prediction, especially when the full 20-letter alphabet is used to represent amino acid sequences. The connections between burial levels and secondary structures (shaded symbols) and between burial levels and two possible side chain orientations (obtained from the comparison between C and C burials and represented as half-shaded symbols) were also investigated by incorporating the corresponding hidden variables into the HMM states. Both approaches were successful in improving the prediction of burial levels, and the usage of secondary structures was slightly more effective than that of side-chain orientations. Incidentally, it was found that not only the prediction accuracy of burial levels but also that of secondary structures is improved when both features are considered together (data not shown). Our most accurate results for burial prediction were around 67.5 and 68.5 of correctly classified residues, respectively, for C and C. Corresponding prediction information values of $0.13 and 0.14 bit are higher than the lower limits provided by IQ 1 ; B 0 , as was consistently observed for the HMM algorithm, particularly with the configurations that employed additional descriptors to the hidden variables and fragment sizes of at least six to seven residues. As with the NBC, prediction of C was generally better than that of C. Since the HMM algorithm works with relative probabilities of fragments of burial levels, it is meaningful to estimate the density of prediction information, i p , according to Equation (S12) of the Supplementary Information, i.e. the amount of new prediction information discovered for each new residue once the previous burials have already been established.shows h N BjBQ (a) Equation (S14) of the Supplementary Information, for the various HMM prediction schemes for C burials, as well as corresponding values of h N B, Equation (S13) of the Supplementary Information, computed from block entropies shown in. The difference between these quantities is the estimate for the prediction information density, i p , Equation (S12) of the Supplementary Information, which is shown in (b). Our results can be compared with the corresponding estimates for the mutual information density between sequences and burials, iB; Q, from, also displayed in (b) as dotted horizontal lines, which should act as effective upper limits on prediction quality. Analogous results for C burials are shown in the Supplementary Information. Since i p for N ! 7 agrees within sampling error with iB; Q, it is suggested that our best overall results for two burial levels are extracting virtually all of the burial information that is available in local sequences.compares the prediction information achieved when the NBC and HMM methods are applied to predict discrete C burials into more than two layers. Analogous results for C are shown in the Supplementary Information. In all cases, it is clear that the quality of prediction is improved when the number of) and prediction information I p (c,d) for two levels of C burials with different identity alphabets. Plots in the first column (a,c) show results for NBC predictions; the second column (b,d) refers to the HMM results. The NBC method is bounded, within error, to the limits established by corresponding IQ 1 ; B 0 estimates (dotted horizontal lines), while the same limits are surpassed by the HMM method (d). In all plots, unshaded symbols represent the simplest version of each algorithm (NBC1 or HMM with nothing but burial levels encoded into the hidden variables) and shaded symbols represent improved versions (NBC2 or HMM with secondary structures). For HMM, half-shaded symbols represent the version that used side-chain orientationsB 0 between amino acid identity at position i, Q i , within the N-block of identities Q N , and central C burial, B 0 , for 20 amino acid letters and various numbers of burial levels (a) and limiting behavior for the sum of positional mutual information terms, obtained with fixed block size N 31, as a function of the number of burial levels for C and C atoms (b) layers is increased up to a number of 4. The rise in quality for five or six layers, however, is less significant, suggesting an upper limit for the number of layers into which it is useful to split a protein for burial-level prediction. As already observed for two burial layers, prediction information tends to be larger for C when compared with C atoms. Furthermore,. For HMM results, the density of prediction information, i p , can be calculated as the difference between an N-dependent estimate for the entropy density of burial levels, h N B, Equation (S13) of the Supplementary Information (shown as a solid line in a), and an analogous estimate for the entropy density conditional to prediction, h N BjBQ, Equation (S14) of the Supplementary Information (shown as points in a). Resulting differences are plotted in (b) in comparison to the upper limit provided by the observed existing mutual information density between burials and sequences, iB; Q (horizontal dashed lines). The results for C predictions are shown here. Analogous results for C predictions are shown in the Supplementary Information. Point symbols are encoded similarly toincreases, the quality of prediction, as measured by the prediction information, I p , also improves, at least up to four to five layers. The results are shown for NBC2 and HMM C predictions. Analogous results for C are shown in the Supplementary Information. Window size of 15 and fragment size of 7 were used for NBC and HMM, respectively. HMM predictions were performed with no additional descriptors to the hidden variables. Dotted error bars represent the estimated lower bounds for the mutual information between single burial and sequence of identities, IQ 1 ; B 0 Presently investigated burial levels, defined by equiprobable layers of central distances, display some qualitative similarity with burial levels defined from accessible surface areas, as reported by. Oscillations in positional mutual information observed in, reflecting secondary structure exposure periodicity, are also observed in analogous plots involving burials in that previous investigation, although not for identities or secondary structure assignments. Notably, however, single amino acid identities appear to be more informative about accessible surfaces than about central distances. While single residue mutual information between identity and two bins of burials reported by, is 0.15 bit, our presently estimated value for IQ 20 ; B 2 is only 0.07 bit, or about half of the corresponding density, iQ 20 ; B 2 , as shown in. Correlations between adjacent central distances, on the other hand, appear to be larger, as shown by larger values of IB i ; B i1 inwhen compared with values reported in that previous investigation. These discrepancies might be partly associated to different procedures for determination of burial levels. While levels of accessible surfaces were explicitly determined from mutual information maximization, our levels of central distances simply maximize unconditional uncertainty. It is possible, nevertheless, that intrinsic physical differences between the two measures are also involved. Although correlated in globular proteins , it is apparent that accessible surface area should be affected more directly by residue hydrophobicity while being somewhat less dependent on adjacent residues. It is not presently clear how much information could be expected from actual predictions of accessible areas from local sequence, since mutual information densities have not been reported. Weaker correlations when compared with central distances, however, are indicative of a less pronounced increase in prediction information with additional local environment beyond single residue. In any case, even if eventually more predictable than central distances, it remains to be shown if accessible areas can be as efficient in tertiary structure determination. Our prediction results indicate that most of the burial information shared by local sequences is easily captured by simple statistical prediction schemes based on HMM or, to a lesser extent, NBC. Interestingly, IQ 1 ; B 0 is approached by the NBC algorithm, which neglects most identity correlations conditional to single burials, and actually surpassed by the HMM algorithm, which appropriately accounts for such correlations. Furthermore, near-optimal prediction for HMM algorithms is indicated by the corresponding mutual information density approaching our present estimate for i(Q; B). From the results with reduced identity alphabets, it is apparent that only about half of the burial information extractable from local sequence using all 20 amino acid letters is still extractable when the HP-reduced alphabet is used instead. The significant improvement provided by the HPN alphabet, with just a single additional letter, indicates however that judiciously chosen reduced alphabets might still be useful in actual prediction, particularly in situations in which the size of the training set might become a limiting factor. In the opposite situation, when the training set is sufficiently large, prediction could be improved by increasing the number of burial levels, as indicated by, or by including more hidden variables in the HMM. In any case, independently of the size of the databank, burial prediction information is unavoidably restricted within a small fraction of the unconditional burial uncertainty, as provided by the density of mutual information between identities and burials, i(Q; B). Even considering the possibility of judicious partitioning of the databank, such as according to chain size or structural class, the basic situation is unlikely to change significantly. As has been previously noted , a small amount of mutual information between local sequence and structural descriptors, when compared with the descriptor entropy density, indicates that local structure, as reflected in secondary structure or burials, must be largely determined by non-local information. It is useful, however, to distinguish between sequence-dependent and sequence-independent non-local information. After all, a large amount of structure-determining information is provided by sequence-independent constraints, analogous to grammatical rules of human languages (Pereira de AraujoAraujo and). The information to be obtained from sequences, corresponding in the same analogy to the actual literature codified in written texts, should actually be much smaller. The distinction between sequence-dependent and sequence independent information is already apparent locally. The uncertainty of 1 bit for two burial levels of a single C atom, for example, diminishes to 0.6 bit due to sequence-independent local information, or a reduction of 0.4 bit, while around 0.1 bit is resolvable by sequence-dependent local information. A particularly interesting possibility, from the predictors perspective, would correspond to sufficient sequence-dependent information for tertiary structure determination being exclusively local, while non-local information would be sequence-independent. A large amount of sequence-independent non-local structural information is actually inferred from the small expected total number of protein shapes, s , which has been estimated by different groups to be in the order of several thousands . If s is assumed to be 10 000, for example, the corresponding entropy would be limited from above by log 2 s and could not be more than around 13 bits per structure, or only 0.05 bit/residue for a putative typical length of 260 residues (0.1 bit/residue for 130 residues). This would be the uncertainty about whole structures, and therefore burials, to be resolved from sequence. The large remaining single burial uncertainty, e.g. 1 005 095 bits/residue for two C burial levels, must therefore be resolvable by sequence-independent information, both local ( 0:4 bits/residue, as discussed above) and non-local ( 0:55 bits/residue, as a consequence). Note that even if the total effective number of structures turns out to be larger or smaller by up to two orders of magnitude, the estimated amount of sequence-dependent structural information could not change by more than a couple of centibits/residue. It is interesting that an independent argument, based the thermodynamic stability of globular proteins, provided a compatible entropy estimate, 1030 bits per macromolecule . This small amount of sequence-dependent information (literature), when compared with the large amount of sequenceindependent constraints (grammar), is an unavoidable consequence of a modest total number of structures when compared with possible sequences. It is also clearly consistent with the sound elusiveness of possible solutions for the problem of ab initio protein structure prediction, contrasting to significant success in homology modeling. Note that the entropy of whole amino acid sequences must indeed be much larger than structural entropy since many sequences fold to each single structure , although smaller, and less trivial, than estimated from local statistics. Long-range sequence correlations have been detected and must produce deviations from markovicity, contributing not only to reduce the entropy but also to destroy its linear dependence on chain length. Crucially, in any case, the presently reported small information for burial predictions can still turn out to be sufficient for structural determination when combined to appropriate sequence-independent constraints.Knowledge about atomic burial levels has been previously shown to be both sufficient for structural determination of small globular proteins and entropically compatible with amino acid sequences. Our present results, however, indicate that only a fraction around 15, at least for C and C atoms, of burial uncertainty is resolvable by local amino acid sequence. On the bright side, most of this sequence-dependent burial information is easily extractable by simple prediction schemes, such as the presently implemented NBC and HMM. Most importantly, these predictions provide parameters for future folding simulations completely independent of knowledge about the native structure. The possibility of structural prediction of globular proteins from amino acid sequence using atomic burials as informational intermediates, including a possible combined improvement of sequence-independent constraints and burial prediction schemes, can now be investigated directly. 
