Integrated genome browser: visual analytics platform for genomics Motivation: Genome browsers that support fast navigation through vast datasets and provide interactive visual analytics functions can help scientists achieve deeper insight into biological systems. Toward this end, we developed Integrated Genome Browser (IGB), a highly configurable, interactive and fast open source desktop genome browser. Results: Here we describe multiple updates to IGB, including all-new capabilities to display and interact with data from high-throughput sequencing experiments. To demonstrate, we describe example visualizations and analyses of datasets from RNA-Seq, ChIP-Seq and bisulfite sequencing experiments. Understanding results from genome-scale experiments requires viewing the data in the context of reference genome annotations and other related datasets. To facilitate this, we enhanced IGBs ability to consume data from diverse sources, including Galaxy, Distributed Annotation and IGB-specific Quickload servers. To support future visualization needs as new gen-ome-scale assays enter wide use, we transformed the IGB codebase into a modular, extensible platform for developers to create and deploy all-new visualizations of genomic data. Availability and implementation: IGB is open source and is freely available from http://bioviz.org/igb.Genome browsers are visualization software tools that display genomic data in interactive, graphical formats. Since the 1990s, genome browsers have played an essential role in genomics, first as tools for building, inspecting, and annotating assemblies and later as tools for distributing data to the public . Later, the rise of genome-scale assays created the need for a new generation of genome browsers that could display users experimental data alongside reference sequence data and annotations. Integrated Genome Browser (IGB), first developed in 2001 at Affymetrix, was among the first of this new breed of tools. IGB was first written to support Affymetrix scientists and collaborators who were using whole genome tiling arrays to probe gene expression and transcription factor binding sites as part of the ENCODE project . As such, IGB was designed from the start to display what we would now call big data in bioinformaticsmillions of probe intensity values per sample. IGB was one of the first genome browsers to support visual analytics, in which interactive visual interfaces augment our natural ability to notice patterns in data . The thresholding feature described below is an example. Because early IGB development was publicly funded, Affymetrix released IGB and its companion graphics library, the Genoviz Software Development Kit , as open source software in 2004. Since then, we have continued to develop IGB, adding new features and incorporating libraries and code from many other open source projects, e.g. Cytoscape . Our first article introducing IGB appeared in 2009 and focused on visualization of tiling array data. Here, we describe new visual analytics and data integration features developed for highthroughput sequencing data. We also introduce a new plug-in V C The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press.IGB is implemented as a stand-alone, rich client desktop program using the Java programming language. To run IGB, users download and run platform-specific installers; these support automatic updates and include the Java virtual machine, making it unnecessary for users to install (and maintain) Java separately. IGBs implementation as a local application rather than as a Web app means that IGB can access the full processing power of the users local computer. IGB is always present on the users desktop, regardless of internet connection status, but IGB can also use the Web to consume data, as described below. Because IGB runs locally, users view their own datasets without uploading them to a server, which can be important when working with confidential data. 
