Interactive analysis of large cancer copy number studies with Copy Number Explorer Copy number abnormalities (CNAs) such as somatically-acquired chromosomal deletions and duplications drive the development of cancer. As individual tumor genomes can contain tens or even hundreds of large and/or focal CNAs, a major difficulty is differentiating between important , recurrent pathogenic changes and benign changes unrelated to the subjects phenotype. Here we present Copy Number Explorer, an interactive tool for mining large copy number datasets. Copy Number Explorer facilitates rapid visual and statistical identification of recurrent regions of gain or loss, identifies the genes most likely to drive CNA formation using the cghMCR method and identifies recurrently broken genes that may be disrupted or fused. The software also allows users to identify recurrent CNA regions that may be associated with differential survival.Huge volumes of genomics data from nearly every cancer type are now freely available and innovative projects such as UCSC Cancer Genomics Browser , cBioPortal and arrayMap have begun to collate and store this information. Those analyzing cancer copy number data often wish to know the location of recurrent CNAs in a given tumor type and which genes are likely to be driving that gain or loss. Additionally, some may wish to know which genes are recurrently broken as this can indicate a potential tumor suppressor loss or gene fusion. It is, however, challenging to analyze CNA regions in these ways using current gene-centric or non-interactive approaches. This is problematic since the presence or absence of a certain CNA can aid in diagnosis, stratify patients into different risk categories or inform therapy decisions. Copy Number Explorer rapidly generates and displays interactive CNA and breakage frequency plots from public data such as the TCGA or from the users own study. The software requires only segmented copy number data as is generated from popular segmentation algorithms such as DNAcopy . Subsequently, it is possible to combine data from different studies or from an internal databaseeven if data were generated using different array designs or next generation sequencing. Here we demonstrate the utility of Copy Number Explorer by applying it to the TCGA Glioblastoma Multiforme (GBM) data . 
