ISQuest: finding insertion sequences in prokaryotic sequence fragment data Motivation: Insertion sequences (ISs) are transposable elements present in most bacterial and archaeal genomes that play an important role in genomic evolution. The increasing availability of sequenced prokaryotic genomes offers the opportunity to study ISs comprehensively, but development of efficient and accurate tools is required for discovery and annotation. Additionally, prokary-otic genomes are frequently deposited as incomplete, or draft stage because of the substantial cost and effort required to finish genome assembly projects. Development of methods to identify IS directly from raw sequence reads or draft genomes are therefore desirable. Software tools such as Optimized Annotation System for Insertion Sequences and IScan currently identify IS elements in completely assembled and annotated genomes; however, to our knowledge no methods have been developed to identify ISs from raw fragment data or partially assembled genomes. We have developed novel methods to solve this computationally challenging problem, and implemented these methods in the software package ISQuest. This software identifies bacterial ISs and their sequence elementsinverted and direct repeatsin raw read data or contigs using flexible search parameters. ISQuest is capable of finding ISs in hundreds of partially assembled genomes within hours, making it a valuable high-throughput tool for a global search of IS elements. We tested ISQuest on simulated read libraries of 3810 complete bacterial genomes and plasmids in GenBank and were capable of detecting 82 of the ISs and transposases annotated in GenBank with 80 sequence identity.The ever-increasing number of sequenced bacterial and archaeal genomes provides an opportunity to understand their architecture and evolution. However, as new high-throughput sequencing methods are developed, annotation quickly becomes the bottleneck for genomic research. In addition to open reading frames (ORFs) and regulatory elements, correct annotation of other features such as mobile genetic elements (MGEs) is also essential. These MGEs include bacteriophages, conjugative transposons, integrons, unit transposons, composite transposons and insertion sequences (ISs). Such transposable elements are defined as specific DNA segments that can repeatedly insert into one or more sites in one or more genomes. ISs are transposable elements that are regarded as genomic parasites proliferating in their host and surviving only through horizontal gene transfer . ISs play a major role in genome evolution and plasticity, mediating gene transfers and promoting genome duplication, deletion and rearrangement . Insertion sequences may be abundant in host genomes and are intimately involved in mediating horizontal gene transfer, generation of pseudogenes, genomic rearrangement and alteration of regulatory elements . Experimental evolution in the laboratory has demonstrated that both) and rearrangements can generate beneficial mutations. Prokaryotic DDE transposons (mainly ISs) can move in two different ways, depending on the donor site. Replicative transposons copy their DNA, leaving the parent site intact, while conservative transposons cut themselves out of the donor molecule in order to paste their DNA into the target. Despite the development of various annotation programs for particular genomic features, some important features such as insertion sequences (ISs), the smallest and simplest autonomous MGEs, remain poorly annotated. In many cases, annotations of these elements include only ORFs and ignore terminal inverted repeats (TIRs), which are an essential feature of their activity in mediating gene rearrangements. Moreover, partial ISs are rarely annotated, leading to the loss of potentially valuable evolutionary information. Another major limitation of current tools is the requirement of a complete annotated genome sequence for IS identification and analysis. The majority of ISs are between 700 and 3000 bp and possess one or two ORFs that encode transposases or helper proteins. For an IS element with more than one ORF, the first (upstream) ORF encodes a DNA recognition domain, while the second overlapping ORF encodes the catalytic domain. There are two types of IS: ISs carrying TIRs elements; and ISs not carrying TIR elements. A TIR IS element carries a pair of partially conserved 7 to 20 bp inverted repeats at its terminus for cleavage and binding of the transposase. Upon insertion, ISs often generate short directed repeats from 2 to 14 bp immediately outside the IRs . ISs of the non-TIR type do not have discernible conserved inverted repeats. Metagenomic analysis has revealed that IS transposases are among the most abundant and ubiquitous genes in nature . Based on transposase sequence similarities, ISs have been classified in 25 different families that belong to three main classes of enzymes: DDE transposases; serine recombinases and tyrosine recombinases . Another recent classification of ISs categorizes them into 26 families based on transposase homology and overall organization, with some families divided further into groups . An IS family can be defined as a collection of elements sharing conserved spacers between key residues, identical genetic organization, similar terminal sequence arrangements and uniform target insertion behavior. However, not all families are so coherent. Consequently, some (e.g. families IS4 and IS5) are divided into subgroups composed of a core of closely related elements that can be linked to other members of the family by weaker but still significant similarities. The naming convention of transposable elements (insertion sequences, transposons, etc.) generally follows the recommendations of). However, in some cases a revised system of IS naming is used based on a registry where researchers can request for a new sequence number to define novel mobile elements . IS and transposable element abundance in prokaryotes is highly variable but they occupy a substantial fraction of some genomes. For example, 11 and 25 of the genome in Clostridium difficile and Enterococcus faecalis is composed of mobile elements . Therefore, it is estimated that an average of up to 10 of bacterial and archaeal genomes are comprised of MGEs. Current IS-related software tools such as IScan and Optimized Annotation System for Insertion Sequences (OASIS) operate only on complete genomes with fully annotated ORFs. Complete genome assembly of a single strain of bacteria can be time-consuming and costly, due in large part to ambiguities introduced by repetitive elements themselves. Consequently, most publicly available prokaryotic genomes are deposited as incomplete, contig-or scaffoldlevel assemblies, and IS and other repetitive elements may or may not be present in the deposited sequence. For example, Celera WGS , a widely used assembly software, commonly moves full or partial IS elements to a degenerates folder that is not frequently deposited as part of the draft genome. Therefore, to perform a global investigation of ISs in unassembled prokaryote genomes, we developed ISQuest, or Insertion Sequence Quest, a computational tool for automated detection of ISs in unassembled or partially assembled genomes. ISQuest takes advantage of widely available transposase annotations to identify candidate IS seed regions and then uses a computationally efficient extension method based on BLAST to grow the seed regions and identify the edges of each IS element. ISQuest is capable of finding MGEs in hundreds of genomes within hours, making it a valuable high-throughput tool for a global search of IS elements. We applied ISQuest to 3810 sequenced bacterial genome and plasmid sequences. Compared with the benchmark of GenBank annotations, ISQuest identified 82 successfully with 80 sequence identity.We performed two experiments to show the MGE detection capability of ISQuest and present a summary of IS sequences found by ISQuest classified by IS family. The performance of the ISQuest tool was compared with that of OASIS using annotated transposases in GenBank as a benchmark. This first experiment compared the accuracy of ISQuest and OASIS by measuring the percentage of GenBank annotated ISs found by each tool. Unlike ISQuest, OASIS operates on completely assembled and annotated genomes and uses only the annotation information available in the genome. ISQuest operates on partially assembled contigs or directly on the raw reads and does not require annotation to identify the ORFs. This experiment shows the predictive capability of ISQuest to find ISs from a draft and un-annotated assembly and compares it to the predictive capability of OASIS using completely annotated sequences. The capability of ISQuest to find other repetitive elements (e.g. rRNA operons) is not measured in this experiment. As ISQuest uses an un-annotated draft genome, ORFs are not clearly defined and finding the exact lengths of the MGEs is difficult using the seed extension algorithm. Therefore, due to these inaccuracies, the testing result inconsiders 70 sequence length match as a true positive; if ISQuest returns a sequence that matches a 70 of the length of an annotated sequence in GenBank with 95 sequence similarity we consider it a true positive. The count numbers in the figure represent IS counts in single-copy; multiple copies of a particular IS are not included. Within the 3810 benchmarked genomes and plasmids, ISQuest found 84.5 of the 9422 unique GenBank annotations, whereas OASIS found 58.9. The 5346 GenBank ISs found both by ISQuest and OASIS represent insertion sequences with well-defined inverted repeats. The 2558 sequences found by ISQuest and also present in GenBank are full and partial transposase elements that do not contain completely defined inverted repeats and therefore cannot be identified by OASIS. The 1350 annotations found only by ISQuest include partially assembled insertion sequences and partial MGEs found by ISQuest that have not been annotated in deposited genomes. These sequences may also include potential sets of new insertion sequence and transposase elements identified by ISQuest based on sequence similarity to other ISs in GenBank. The intersection of ISQuest and OASIS is zero as ISQuest cannot identify any sequence that has not been annotated in more than one GenBank submission using the keywords transposase, or insertion sequence in the product field. ISQuest does not take the annotated genome as input and therefore requires similar annotation to be present in other submissions. We further evaluated ISQuest under increasingly strict constraints by increasing the length match threshold which we accept as a true positive to 80 and 90 of the sequence length .shows the results of considering only sequences with greater than or equal to 80 length matches with 95 sequence similarity with GenBank sequences as valid true positives of ISQuest. We notice a slight reduction in the number of insertion sequences detected by ISQuest to 82.2 of the 9422 unique GenBank annotations. Increasing the length match threshold to 90 shows significant reduction in the number of insertion sequences detected by ISQuest to 65.7. However, this shows that ISQuest is able to reproduce 90 of the actual IS sequence using the fast seed extension algorithm in the majority of cases. 
