Genome analysis JEPEG: a summary statistics based tool for gene-level joint testing of functional variants Motivation: Gene expression is influenced by variants commonly known as expression quantitative trait loci (eQTL). On the basis of this fact, researchers proposed to use eQTL/functional information univariately for prioritizing single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) signals from genome-wide association studies (GWAS). However, most genes are influenced by multiple eQTLs which, thus, jointly affect any downstream phenotype. Therefore, when compared with the univariate prioritization approach , a joint modeling of eQTL action on phenotypes has the potential to substantially increase signal detection power. Nonetheless, a joint eQTL analysis is impeded by (i) not measuring all eQTLs in a gene and/or (ii) lack of access to individual genotypes. Results: We propose joint effect on phenotype of eQTL/functional SNPs associated with a gene (JEPEG), a novel software tool which uses only GWAS summary statistics to (i) impute the summary statistics at unmeasured eQTLs and (ii) test for the joint effect of all measured and imputed eQTLs in a gene. We illustrate the behavior/performance of the developed tool by analysing the GWAS meta-analysis summary statistics from the Psychiatric Genomics Consortium Stage 1 and the Genetic Consortium for Anorexia Nervosa. Conclusions: Applied analyses results suggest that JEPEG complements commonly used univari-ate GWAS tools by: (i) increasing signal detection power via uncovering (a) novel genes or (b) known associated genes in smaller cohorts and (ii) assisting in fine-mapping of challenging regions, e.g. major histocompatibility complex for schizophrenia. Availability and implementation: JEPEG, its associated database of eQTL SNPs and usage examples are publicly available atUnivariate analysis of genome-wide association studies (GWAS) has emerged as the main tool for identifying trait/disease-associated genetic variants . However, against initial expectations, most variants reported by complex trait GWAS are common single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) with weak or moderate effect sizes, which account for only a small fraction of the overall phenotypic variation . Presumably, most common causal variants are not detected in GWAS due to their small effect sizes . Therefore, to identify a greater V C The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press.While H 0 summary datasets were simulated based on the fairly homogenous samples from UK10K and analysed using the multiethnic 1KG Europeans reference panel, JEPEG still controls the Type I error rates at or below the nominal level . The results suggest that JEPEG with the ridge correction is reasonably robust to (non-African) intracontinental LD variations. In PGC1 BD cohort, out of 13 552 genes with reliable functional information, we detected 10 significant and 4 suggestive signals . The most significant gene (q-value 3 10 4 ) was RASGEF1A (10q11.21), which was never reported to be associated with BD. For this gene, JEPEG database contained functional annotation information for only six trans-eQTL SNPs on chromosome 6, with the most significant residing near SYNE1, a gene already detected univariately in PGC1 BD meta-analysis . The second most significant gene was the SYNE1 gene (q-value 8 10 4 ) itself, for which the statistic was obtained based on 38 nearby eQTL SNPs. Five of the significant genes belong to ITIH cluster on chromosome 3, which also encompasses two other suggestive genes. It is notable that ITIH cluster did not yield any significant SNP signal in PGC1 BD (or SCZ) but was detected univariately only in the (much larger) combined analysis of PGC1 BD and SCZ . For the same cohort, VEGAS detected 27 significant and 8 suggestive gene signals out of 17 789 genes (Supplementary). Significant signals were obtained from six gene regions, where, except the marginally significant chr2 LMAN2L and chr19 NFIX (albeit VEGAS standard errors are orders of magnitude larger than the small estimated P-values), also detected by JEPEG. VEGAS did not detect RASGEF1A. We note that while most regions were detected by both multivariate methods, JEPEG appears to fine-map these regions by returning smaller gene lists. For the SCZ cohort, out of 13 420 genes with functional information, 18 and 13 genes harbored significant and suggestive signals, respectively . However, only six significant genes were outside the major histocompatibility complex (MHC) region (chr6: 2833.5 Mb), which has been associated with SCZ in many Caucasian GWAS . We underscore the detection of a significant signal for MAD1L1 (q-value 0.01). This gene was not identified in univariately in PGC1 SCZ, but was detected in a larger PGC1 follow-up study, which included additional Swedish cohorts . We also detected 3 significant and 3 suggestive gene signals from ITIH cluster. We also note the strong significant SCZ signals in NKAPL and ZKSCAN4, which were the only MHC genes harboring significant signals in a Han Chinese SCZ GWAS . Meanwhile, for the same data, VEGAS detected only 3 significant (ABCC12, SRCAP and ZNF629) and 2 suggestive (PHKG2 and ZNF681) gene signals out of 17 704 genes (Supplementary). We mention that none of the genes with significant VEGAS signal are located within LD independent SCZ association regions from the latest PGC SCZ Stage 2 study . For PGC1 MDD and GCAN studies, neither multivariate method yields any significant findings. While disappointing, our findings closely mirror the univariate results. An increase in sample size for the two disorders might help increase signal detection power for all methods. On a computation node with 4x Intel Xeon 6 core 2.67-GHz processor and 64 GB of RAM, the single core JEPEG analyses for any of the four summary datasets required slightly under 2 h of running time and less than 8 GB of peak memory usage. The web-based VEGAS software (http://gump.qimr.edu.au/VEGAS/) at default settings required around 1 day of computation time for each summary dataset. 
