Joint amalgamation of most parsimonious reconciled gene trees Motivation: Traditionally, gene phylogenies have been reconstructed solely on the basis of molecular sequences; this, however, often does not provide enough information to distinguish between statistically equivalent relationships. To address this problem, several recent methods have incorporated information on the species phylogeny in gene tree reconstruction, leading to dramatic improvements in accuracy. Although probabilistic methods are able to estimate all model parameters but are computationally expensive, parsimony methodsgenerally computationally more ef-ficientrequire a prior estimate of parameters and of the statistical support. Results: Here, we present the Tree Estimation using Reconciliation (TERA) algorithm, a parsimony based, species tree aware method for gene tree reconstruction based on a scoring scheme combining duplication, transfer and loss costs with an estimate of the sequence likelihood. TERA explores all reconciled gene trees that can be amalgamated from a sample of gene trees. Using a large scale simulated dataset, we demonstrate that TERA achieves the same accuracy as the corresponding probabilistic method while being faster, and outperforms other parsimony-based methods in both accuracy and speed. Running TERA on a set of 1099 homologous gene families from complete cyanobacterial genomes, we find that incorporating knowledge of the species tree results in a two thirds reduction in the number of apparent transfer events. Availability and implementation: The algorithm is implemented in our program TERA, which is freely available fromMolecular phylogenetics infers gene trees based on the information contained in molecular sequences. Unfortunately, individual sequences may contain limited signal, and, as a result, phylogenetic reconstruction often involves choosing between statistically equivalent or weakly distinguishable evolutionary relationships. Although each homologous gene family has its own unique story, these are all related by a shared species historywhich can be helpful for gene tree inference . In the past decade, several methods have been developed that model the evolutionary processes that generate gene trees within the species tree . From an inference perspective, these methods attempt to find the optimal way to explain the phylogenetic signal in extant sequencesrepresented as a gene treegiven the species tree. They explore the set of possible reconciliations, i.e. different ways to draw the gene tree into the species tree given some combination of macro evolutionary events, such as gene duplications, gene transfers, gene losses and incomplete lineage sorting. Studies that incorporate such events into gene tree inference have shown that information on the species phylogeny significantly improves the accuracy of gene tree inference . To design such species tree aware methods for reconstructing gene phylogenies, the space of reconciled gene trees must be explored using information from both a model of sequence evolution and a reconciliation model, in order to optimize a joint sequence-reconciliation score. Such exploration is computationally expensive with traditional optimization approaches that rely on the local search of the space of gene trees. To circumvent this problem, David and Alm (2010) introduced the amalgamation algorithm, described in detail in Section 2.3 below and illustrated in. Furthermore, Sz llo si et al.recently developed an approach to exhaustively explore all reconciled gene trees that can be amalgamated from a sample of gene trees, i.e. obtainable by combining clades observed in the sample. Additionally, their methodALE, for Amalgamated Likelihood Estimationcombines the amalgamation algorithm of David and Alm (2010) with conditional clade probabilities (CCPs) introduced by H hna and Drummond (2012) and reconstructs the gene phylogenies by optimizing a joint sequence-reconciliation likelihood score, resulting in gene trees that are dramatically more accurate than those reconstructed using molecular sequences alone. ALE overcomes a fundamental limitation of recent parsimony based methods that improve gene trees given a putative species tree . Unlike those methods, it does not require the user to specify a cost for each type of event or a threshold on statistical supports. However, ALE faces the drawbacks associated with probabilistic methods. In particular: (i) when computing the reconciliation score, ALE has an increased computational cost compared with a parsimony algorithm (e.g.), which is due to a potentially large constant factor resulting from the numerical integration of the likelihood; (ii) ALEs results are contingent on difficult to estimate time-like branch lengths of the species tree, while parsimony methods can reconcile gene trees relying only on the order of speciations in time (e.g.), and even deal with undated species trees (e.g.). Parsimony methods in general, despite lacking an explicit connection to a generative probabilistic model and relying on other heuristics, have been shown to be highly accurate, comparable to sophisticated probabilistic reconciliation methods, with reduced runtime . Here we present the TERA algorithm (Tree Estimation using Reconciliation and Amalgamation) that amalgamates the most parsimonious reconciled gene tree from a set of gene trees reconstructed from a unique gene alignment, according to a joint sequence-reconciliation score. Although TERA, like other parsimony based methods, requires the prior specification of the costs associated with duplication, transfer and loss (DTL) events, it does not require prior assumptions about a statistical support threshold, as it estimates a self-consistent support threshold from its input. Furthermore, TERA considers explicitly the possibility of transfer from extinct or unsampled branches of the species tree, which is expected to be the case for practically all transfers (Sz llo si et al., 2013a). TERA does not, however, consider incomplete lineage sorting.. CCPs can be used to estimate the posterior probability of any tree that can be amalgamated from clades present in a sample of gene trees . Conditional clade frequencies can be used to approximate CCPs and are computed as the proportion of occurrences of a particular split of a clade according to a tripartition p, e.g. (abc j de) among all trees in which the clade, e.g. (abcde), is found. Estimates based on the sample of trees on the left are shown as fractions for two different gene trees that can be amalgamated. The estimate for a gene tree is given by the sum of the reconciliation score and the logarithm of the tree CCPs. Based on the sample on the left, the tree with the highest posterior probability is the third tree (blue online). Reconciling it with the species tree requires one transfer and one loss event. It is, however, possible to combine clades present in the second (green online) and third (blue online) trees to produce a gene tree that is not present in the original sample but is identical to the species tree, i.e. it requires no events to draw it into the species tree. Depending on the costs of transfer and loss events, and the self-consistently estimated c A parameter, the scenario without transfer might be optimal for the joint scoreThe self-consistent score estimation scheme used by TERA, introduced in Section 2.4, should be applicable to other parsimony methods, while amalgamation is in theory compatible with any reconciliation algorithm that assumes branches of the gene tree to be independent.To test the accuracy of gene trees reconstructed using TERA we chose a dataset based on 1099 homologous gene families present in 36 cyanobacterial genomes. This dataset, published in Sz llo si et al. (2013b), was constructed using homologous families from the HOGENOM database and contains both real and simulated alignments as well as the gene trees used to simulate sequences. The mean number of genes per family in this dataset is 36.66, the largest family has 114 genes and the smallest 21 genes; the mean number of species in which a family is found is 31.49, with a minimum of 4 and a maximum of 36; the mean copy number per genomecounting as zero genomes in which a family is absentis 1.012, with a minimum of 0.5833 and a maximum of 3.17. We chose this dataset, because (i) it contains a diverse set of gene families from a reasonably large and divergent set of species, and (ii) the parametric bootstrap-like simulation procedure used attempts to retain as much of the complexity of the underlying biological dataset as possible (Sz llo si et al., 2013b). Furthermore, to emulate the relative complexity of real data compared with available models of sequence evolution, we used a complex model of sequence evolution to simulate sequencesan LG model with across-site rate variation and invariant sitesand used PhyloBayes with a simpler modela Poisson model with no rate variationto produce the sample of gene trees used by both TERA and AnGST (see below for more details).We have presented a detailed description of the TERA algorithm, a parsimony-based species tree aware method of gene tree reconstruction. We demonstrate that TERA reconstructs gene trees with nearly identical accuracy as the more complex ML based ALE method and, at least on the simulated datasets considered here, outperforms the other parsimony based species tree aware methods. Examining a subset of single copy universal gene families we show that TERA does not overfit or underfit the species tree. This result lends credibility to TERAs results on biological data, whereby two thirds of apparent gene transfers in gene trees reconstructed without taking into consideration the species tree are not recovered given knowledge of the species phylogeny. Although parsimony based methods are fundamentally limited in some aspects compared with model based probabilistic methods, in the case of species tree aware gene tree reconstruction our results indicate that parsimony based methods can closely approach their accuracy. A further advantage of TERA compared with the corresponding probabilistic method ALE is that it is faster (if only up to a constant factor), does not require explicit time-like branch lengths that are difficult to estimate, and due to its relative simplicity, in particular the lack of numerical integration, is more robust in practice. Compared with parsimony based methods that require prior assumptions about statistical support, TERA is distinguished by its ability to estimate a statistical support threshold from its input. In contrast to the methods considered here it does require more elaborate upstream analysis, taking as its input a sample of trees from e.g. an MCMC-based tree inference methods, while in contrast MowgliNNI requires a single tree with branch supports, and TreeFix-DTL a multiple sequence alignment. Finally, while we have shown that it is possible to estimate the c A parameter, we have been less successful in estimating all four costs (d; s; k; c A ) simultaneously, due to the tendency of the cost estimates to diverge toward a very low transfer cost, and a correspondingly large number of transfers. We expect that relaxing the, in general, unrealistic assumption of independence between events could ameliorate this problem. 
