Data and text mining KASpOD—a web service for highly specific and explorative oligonucleotide design KASpOD is a web service dedicated to the design of signature sequences using a k-merbased algorithm. Such highly specific and explorative oligonucleotides are then suitable for various goals, including Phylogenetic Oligonucleotide Arrays.Environmental DNA microarrays, including Phylogenetic Oligonucleotide Arrays (POAs), are key technologies that are well adapted to profiling environmental communities . The extreme diversity of microorganisms, however, means that molecular community exploration or specific analysis of microbial groups are faced with a new challenge: designing group-specific probe sets that must harbour a high coverage (i.e. being able to hybridize with all the target sequences) and a high specificity, showing no cross-hybridizations with non-target sequences . Sensitivity (i.e. being able to detect even low abundance targets) and uniformity (i.e. uniform thermodynamic behaviours for all the probes) are also main criteria in the selection of the best probe set . The development of comprehensive POAs requires integrating large datasets produced by metagenomics projects to assess the coverage and specificity of the probe set. Unfortunately, many available probe design programmes are not suitable to deal with such data . To overcome this limitation, two recent strategies have been implemented . Despite major speed improvements, both strategies are still not able to define explorative probes. They only define regular oligonucleotides found uniquely in the target group, whereas explorative probes take into account the sequence variability within the target group to define new combinations not yet deposited in public databases but potentially present in the environment. In spite of large amounts of data, our current vision of the microbial diversity is, indeed, still incomplete. This is partially explained by the tremendous diversity of microbial species, ecological niches and technological limits: detecting 90 of the richness in some complex environments could require tens of thousands of times the current sequencing effort . Microarrays coupled with explorative probe design strategies are, therefore, well suited to survey complete microbial communities, including microorganisms with uncharacterized sequences . Currently, the only software dedicated to POAs that allows the design of explorative probes is the PhylArray programme , which relies on group-specific alignments before the probe design step to identify conserved probe-length regions. Building large multiple sequence alignments, however, represents a time-consuming task that is not compatible with high-throughput data. Here we propose KASpOD, a fast and alignment-free algorithm to detect group-covering signature sequences allowing the design of explorative probes.We used KASpOD to design 25-mer probes for 1295 prokaryotic genera based on the recently published Greengenes taxonomy (see Supplementary Data 1 for complete procedure). Finally, 22 613 group-specific signatures were designed (Supplementary) and are freely available on the KASpOD website (http://g2im.u-clermont1.fr/kaspod/about .php). This high-quality probe set could be used to build a POA to allow monitoring of complete prokaryotic communities in complex environmental samples. The probe set was not filtered using thermodynamic calculations, to let the users select the entire probe set, or subset, for their own applications, such as Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR), Fluorescence In Situ Hybridization (FISH), gene capture or in silico for rapid sequence identification. A runtime performance analysis of the web service has been performed and results are available in the Supplementary Data 3. As KASpOD does not allow the generation of probes longer than 31 nucleotides, an interesting strategy would be to combine KASpOD and GoArrays to concatenate two short probes with a random linker. This approach produces oligonucleotide probes as specific as short probes and as sensitive as long ones. KASpOD could, therefore, be used for applications such as Functional Genes Arrays, offering the opportunity to generate group-specific and explorative probes, allowing a broad coverage of multiple sequence variants for a given gene family. 
