Gene expression LCE: a link-based cluster ensemble method for improved gene expression data analysis Motivation: It is far from trivial to select the most effective clustering method and its parameterization, for a particular set of gene expression data, because there are a very large number of possibilities. Although many researchers still prefer to use hierarchical clustering in one form or another, this is often sub-optimal. Cluster ensemble research solves this problem by automatically combining multiple data partitions from different clusterings to improve both the robustness and quality of the clustering result. However, many existing ensemble techniques use an association matrix to summarize sample-cluster co-occurrence statistics, and relations within an ensemble are encapsulated only at coarse level, while those existing among clusters are completely neglected. Discovering these missing associations may greatly extend the capability of the ensemble methodology for microarray data clustering. Results: The link-based cluster ensemble (LCE) method, presented here, implements these ideas and demonstrates outstanding performance. Experiment results on real gene expression and synthetic datasets indicate that LCE: (i) usually outperforms the existing cluster ensemble algorithms in individual tests and, overall, is clearly class-leading; (ii) generates excellent, robust performance across different types of data, especially with the presence of noise and imbalanced data clusters; (iii) provides a high-level data matrix that is applicable to many numerical clustering techniques; and (iv) is computationally efficient for large datasets and gene clustering.The use of clustering is vital both for visualizing and extracting useful information from microarray data. However, different algorithms (or even the same algorithm with different parameters) often provide distinct clusterings. As a result, it is extremely difficult for users to decide which algorithm and parameters will be optimal for a given set of datathis is because no single-pass/simple To whom correspondence should be addressed. clustering algorithm can perform the best for all datasets , and discovering all types of cluster shapes and structures presented in data is impossible for any known clustering algorithm . Clinical researchers commonly use simple clustering methods, such as agglomerative hierarchical and k-means to cluster cancer microarray samples, despite the advent of several new techniques that capitalize on the inherent characteristics of gene expression data (noise and high dimensionality) to improve clustering quality (e.g.). desays, this is because the use of such methods is difficult for non-expert users. Recently, cluster ensembles or consensus clusterings have emerged as simple, effective, one-stop methods for improving the robustness and quality of clustering results. Cluster ensembles combine multiple clustering decisions (referred to as base clusterings or ensemble members) where the base clusterings contain diversity in their choice of clusters by:(i) using a single clustering algorithm with random parameter initializations ; (ii) employing multiple clustering algorithms ; (iii) selecting a random number of clusters ; (iv) using different subsets of gene ; or (v) using data sampling techniques . Most existing methods compare cluster associations between each of the N samples in the dataset to produce an N N pairwise similarity matrix [i.e. consensus , agreement and co-association matrices], to which a consensus function (e.g. agglomerative hierarchical clustering) is applied to acquire the final data partition. With the ensemble of two base clusterings = 1 , 2 and five samples (x 1 ,...x 5 ) that is given in, the corresponding similarity matrix is shown in. An alternative approach (; Strehl and) to pairwise similarity methods makes use of an N P binary cluster-association matrix (BM) (where P denotes the number of clusters in an ensemble).shows the example of such matrix that is generated from the ensemble of. Despite reported success and efficiency, these methods generate the ultimate clustering result based on incomplete information of a cluster ensemble. The underlying association matrix presents samplecluster relations at a coarse level and completely ignores the relations among clusters . As a result, theThe results 1 with real gene expression data are summarized in, where each investigated clustering method is represented with its average validity measure across all validity indices, datasets and ensemble types. It is clear that LCE regularly performs better than any of these clustering methods. It also enhances the performance of KM, which is used as base clusterings. In particular, HBGF is apparently less effective than LCE. This information suggests that the quality of the refined cluster-association matrix (RM) is superior than the original BM counterpart. See the full results with real gene expression datasets in Supplementary Section 2.3. Following the study of, to rigourously evaluate the quality of investigated clustering techniques, the number of times that one method is significantly better and worse (to 95 confidence level) than the others are assessed across all experiment settings. Let X C (i,) be the average value of validity index C CA, NMI, AR across n runs (n = 50 in this evaluation) for a cluster ensemble method i CM (CM is a set of 12 experimented clustering methods), on a specific experimentsetting ST (ST is a set of 40 unique combination of four ensemble types and ten real gene expression datasets). The 95 CI,. Note that S C (i,) denotes the SD of the validity index C across n runs for a clustering method i and an experiment setting . In addition, multiple runs of any setting ST are different and independenteach with a unique ensemble that is generated by randomly selected parameters, and possibly dissimilar gene subsets. The number of times that one method i CM is significantly better than its competitors, B C (i) (in accordance with the validity criterion C, across all experiment settings), can be defined asSimilarly, the number of times that one method i CM is significantly worse than its competitors, W C (i), in accordance with the validity criterion C, can be computed asUsing the aforementioned assessment formalism,illustrates for each method i CM the statistics of total performance. The results shown in this figure indicate that LCE is more effective than other clustering techniques included in this experiment. Since SL and AL do not perform well over the examined datasets, MULTI-K and CC HC that use the former and latter as a consensus function, respectively, are less accurate than other cluster ensemble methods and KM. However, their performance may improve with an ensemble that is much larger than the one investigated herein (i.e. M 10). In addition to this evaluation scheme, a further performance analysis with a paired t-test is discussed in Supplementary Section 2.4. Another important investigation is on the subject of relations between performance of experimented cluster ensemble methods and different types of ensemble being explored in the present evaluation.shows the average validity measures of different cluster ensemble methods across all validity indices and real gene expression datasets. For each method, its performance with Page: 1518 15131519,0.2,...,0.9 and the performance of the LCE method (the averages of CA, NMI and AR over 10 real gene expression datasets and 4 ensemble types), whose values are presented in X-axis and Y-axis, respectively. Note that the averaged performance of other cluster ensemble methods are also included for a comparison purpose. four ensemble types (Full-space + Fixed-k, Full-space + Random-k, Subspace + Fixed-k, and Subspace + Random-k) are compared. It is clear that LCE is more effective than other cluster ensemble techniques over all ensemble types, with its best performance being generated from a Full-space + Fixed-k ensemble. Most methods work better with Full-space ensembles, as compared to Subspace alternatives. Unlike LCE, GCC and other graph-based techniques that usually produce a superior performance with a Fixed-k ensemble type, MULTI-K and CC HC are best when coupled with Random-k ensembles. Although the results are impressive, on several datasets, it is important to ensure they are obtainable in a wide range of conditions. To this end the LCE algorithms response was examined to perturbations in its parameters, and by investigating its time and space complexity.A new LCE method has been introduced for clustering gene expression data samples that has greatly improved accuracy and efficiency. The performance of LCE is usually superior than existing graph-based ensemble techniques, and those that are particularly developed for gene data analysis. LCE is highly effective over real gene expression datasets and synthetic data collections (with Page: 1519 15131519 
