Genetics and population analysis LDlink: a web-based application for exploring population-specific haplotype structure and linking correlated alleles of possible functional variants Assessing linkage disequilibrium (LD) across ancestral populations is a powerful approach for investigating population-specific genetic structure as well as functionally mapping regions of disease susceptibility. Here, we present LDlink, a web-based collection of bioinformatic modules that query single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in population groups of interest to generate haplotype tables and interactive plots. Modules are designed with an emphasis on ease of use, query flexibility, and interactive visualization of results. Phase 3 haplotype data from the 1000 Genomes Project are referenced for calculating pairwise metrics of LD, searching for proxies in high LD, and enumerating all observed haplotypes. LDlink is tailored for investigators interested in mapping common and uncommon disease susceptibility loci by focusing on output linking correlated alleles and highlighting putative functional variants. Availability and implementation: LDlink is a free and publically available web tool which can be ac-cessed at http://analysistools.nci.nih.gov/LDlink/.Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have identified robust genotype-phenotype associations for a range of disease phenotypes . Linkage disequilibrium (LD), the non-random association of regional variants due to the low probability of meiotic recombination, has facilitated GWAS by enabling the search for markers of risk alleles based on the principle of indirect testing, namely, identification of a proxy for the underlying variant biologically responsible for the phenotype. This can be accomplished with a small fraction of known variants that tag other highly correlated variants. Once disease susceptibility loci are identified, however, the process of choosing plausible variants to explain the observed signal requires a careful assessment of all correlated variants, based on local LD structure. Knowledge of populationspecific LD structure and intuitive bioinformatic tools for interrogating LD are therefore essential for designing association studies and localizing functional variants. Bioinformatic tools are available for assessing LD , but not specifically designed to winnow down perspective candidates to putative functional variants. Existing tools report standard measures of LD with different levels of functional annotation, but none report which alleles are correlated between two single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in LD. Knowing which proxy allele is correlated with a risk allele from a GWAS associated variant is essential for functional studies, especially when plausible functional variants are not directly genotyped. While at times this relationship can be accurately inferred when correlations are high and minor allele frequencies are low, additional bioinformatic analysis is needed when correlations are modest and minor allele frequencies approach 0.5. Such analyses can be timePublished by Oxford University Press 2015. This work is written by US Government employees and is in the public domain in the US.consuming and technically difficult for researchers who lack computational training. LDlink is a web-based LD analysis tool designed to easily query pairwise linkage disequilibrium between SNPs. The web-based modules (LDhap, LDmatrix, LDpair and LDproxy) utilize reference haplotypes from 26 different population groups in Phase 3 of the 1000 Genomes Project (1000G) to produce haplotype tables and interactive plots. LDlink fills in current gaps of existing LD analysis tools by integrating expanded population reference sets, updated functional annotations, and interactive output to explore possible functional variants in high LD. A thorough exploration of the variation and linkage structure that exists across populations should facilitate fine mapping disease susceptibility regions and assist researchers in characterizing functional variants based on genotype-phenotype associations with potential clinical utility. 
