Sequence analysis Log-odds sequence logos Motivation: DNA and protein patterns are usefully represented by sequence logos. However, the methods for logo generation in common use lack a proper statistical basis, and are non-optimal for recognizing functionally relevant alignment columns. Results: We redefine the information at a logo position as a per-observation multiple alignment log-odds score. Such scores are positive or negative, depending on whether a columns observations are better explained as arising from relatedness or chance. Within this framework, we propose distinct normalized maximum likelihood and Bayesian measures of column information. We illustrate these measures on High Mobility Group B (HMGB) box proteins and a dataset of enzyme alignments. Particularly in the context of protein alignments, our measures improve the discrimination of biologically relevant positions. Availability and implementation: Our new measures are implemented in an open-source Web-based logo generation program, which is available at http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/CBBresearch/Yu/ logoddslogo/index.html. A stand-alone version of the program is also available from this site.Patterns or motifs that are shared among multiple DNA or protein sequences often correlate with important biological functions. A widely used method for representing and studying such patterns is provided by sequence logos . A sequence logo represents concisely two important features of a multiple alignmentthe information content at each alignment position and the frequencies of the nucleotides or amino acids observed at that position. Here, we suggest modifications to the way in which the information content is usually measured. These modifications yield a direct connection between the information for an alignment position and a multiple alignment log-odds score . We have implemented a program that uses the modified information measures, and illustrate its application to protein alignments.In the DNA context, it is appropriate to posit ignorance and use Jeffreys priors, essentially rendering measures A and B equivalent. Furthermore, although these measures are formally distinct from the entropy difference measure , for uniform background frequencies, they differ only by an N-dependent constant, which approaches 0 as N grows. Measures A and B do differ substantially from entropy difference in the important case of non-uniform background frequencies, but for large datasets, they are still similar to the known relative-entropy measure. Thus, it is primarily in the protein context that a user will encounter noticeable differences between the measures we propose and other measures in common use. Here, to apply measure B to proteins, we use the Dirichet mixture dist-ncbi134, described in. For the sake of consistent comparison, we use the background frequencies implied by this mixture throughout. When used to analyze proteins, logos are usually applied to multiple alignments in which all the sequence segments included are, in fact, related. The primary purpose is to visualize those positions that are the most conserved, and thus presumably the most relevant to protein structure and function. To illustrate the behavior of our various measures, we first apply them to a particular HMGB box alignment in which the most important positions may be independently determined by structural features and by conservation within a broader encompassing family. Second, we consider a set of alignments of enzyme families, in which the catalytic sites stand as proxies for the most important positions. 
