Genetics and population analysis Analysis of case–control association studies with known risk variants Motivation: The question of how to best use information from known associated variants when conducting disease association studies has yet to be answered. Some studies compute a marginal P-value for each Several Nucleotide Polymorphisms independently, ignoring previously discovered variants. Other studies include known variants as covariates in logistic regression, but a weakness of this standard conditioning strategy is that it does not account for disease prevalence and non-random ascertainment, which can induce a correlation structure between candidate variants and known associated variants even if the variants lie on different chromosomes. Here, we propose a new conditioning approach, which is based in part on the classical technique of liability threshold modeling. Roughly, this method estimates model parameters for each known variant while accounting for the published disease prevalence from the epidemiological literature. Results: We show via simulation and application to empirical datasets that our approach outperforms both the no conditioning strategy and the standard conditioning strategy, with a properly controlled false-positive rate. Furthermore, in multiple data sets involving diseases of low prevalence, standard conditioning produces a severe drop in test statistics whereas our approach generally performs as well or better than no conditioning. Our approach may substantially improve disease gene discovery for diseases with many known risk variants. Availability: LTSOFT software is available onlineThe NHGRI catalog of Published Genome Wide Association Studies (GWAS) lists thousands of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) associated with several hundred complex phenotypes. However, it is currently unknown how to optimally use these discovered SNPs when conducting additional GWAS. Typically, known variants are ignored and SNPs are tested independently for association via logistic regression for case control phenotypes and linear regression for quantitative phenotypes . Occasionally, known variants are used as covariates in the regression models to determine additional signals exist in the data beyond those already discovered, as in recent studies of Type 2 diabetes . We show that for standard casecontrol studies neither one of these strategies, testing SNPs marginally or standard conditioning on associated variants, is optimally powered to discover new loci. Surprisingly, standard conditioning will often dramatically decrease power . For example, in the Welcome Trust Case Control Consortium (WTCCC), Type 1 diabetes (T1D) dataset (WTCCC, 2007b), conditioning on a known variant on Chromosome 6 decreases the one degree of freedom (df) 2 statistic from a logistic regression likelihood ratio test by an average of 27 at independent known associated variants on entirely different chromosomes relative to the same test without conditioning on theThe theory presented in Section 2 above modeled casecontrol phenotypes under a liability threshold model and estimated the power of linear regression with no covariates (NOCOND-lin), linear regression conditioned on known variants (STDCOND-lin) and our liability threshold model-based LTSCORE, under various ascertainment scenarios. Here, we examine the relative benefits of the three classes of statistical tests NOCOND, STDCOND and LTSCORE over simulated and real data. For NOCOND and STDCOND, we conduct most of our analyses using the logistic regression versions NOCOND-log and STDCOND-log, but we have verified that NOCOND-lin and STDCOND-lin produce very similar results (see below). There are many equivalencies between the logit model, the liability threshold model and the multiplicative relative risk model . To be maximally conservative and to demonstrate that the results derived in Methods section hold for different disease models, we simulate our case control phenotypes under a logit model. This prevents our method from having an unfair advantage due to testing the same model that generated the data. As shown below similar results were obtained when using linear instead of logistic regression and the liability threshold model instead of the logit model. LTSCORE computes posterior mean of the residual of the liability, using liability threshold model parameters that account for disease prevalence and study design, and then uses posterior mean as input to linear regression (see Section 2). The LTSCORE parameters are estimated from published disease prevalence data. This external information, unavailable to either NOCOND-log or STDCOND-log, is the basis of the improvement of LTSCORE. We are interested in the effects of known associated SNPs on association tests for undiscovered SNPs that are in complete linkage equilibrium (e.g. those on completely different chromosomes) with the known associated SNPs in the population. In both the simulated and real datasets below, we never condition on SNPs that are in LD with the candidate SNP. The derivations above assumed a liability threshold model of disease. However, both the STDCONDlog and NOCOND-log tests assume a logit model of disease as they are applications of logistic regression. We compare the the performance of the methods by measuring the ratio of the average 2 test-statistics produced by each method. This has a natural interpretation of the increase in sample size needed to obtain the equivalent power . For example, if LTSCORE gives 10 increase in test-statistic over STDCONDlog, this corresponds to adding 10 more individuals to a study analyzed with STDCOND-log to achieve the power of the original study analyzed by LTSCORE.We have shown that the practice of standard conditioning on known associated variants does not account for study design and disease prevalence potentially leading to significant power loss. This power loss is due to the induced correlation between associated variants in casecontrol studies. The phenomenon of higher odds ratios in cases with fewer risk alleles at other loci than in cases with more risk alleles at other loci can be viewed as a gene gene interaction . This is a statistical, rather than biological, interaction. By properly modeling the ascertainment and prevalence while still leveraging known associated variants, our LTSCORE statistic improves study power relative to NOCONDlog and STDCOND-log tests in casecontrol studies of mid-to-low prevalence diseases. This increase in power is a function of the total phenotypic variance explained by known variants and disease prevalence. The datasets examined here had either a low-prevalence or a small fraction of the variance explained and therefore we did not expect a large improvement. However, as more associated variants are discovered, the performance of LTSCORE will increase giving rise to power gains as a function of covariate effect size and disease prevalence. This approach can also be applied to clinical covariates, and in this case, an average power gain of 17 was achieved (unpublished data). We have verified that results similar to Supplementaryare obtained when comparing genetic + clinical covariates to clinical covariates only (see Supplementary). However, conditioning on clinical covariates is a fundamentally different problem, both because a different parameter estimation method is needed and because with clinical covariates, it is often the case that samples are non-randomly ascertained for covariate value as well as casecontrol status. A recent T2D meta-analysis uses the standard conditioning statistic and shows a significant gain in power. Their ratio of cases to controls is closer to a randomly ascertained study and in this case we expect STDCOND-log to outperform NOCOND-log and increase power. In addition to their beneficial study design, some of the conditioned variants are proximal to the new discoveries. Both of the elements serve to improve the power of standard conditioning. also examine the potential benefits of genomewide conditioning in T2D. However, we believe the use of our LTSCORE statistic on these data could improve the power further 
