Systems biology Metab: an R package for high-throughput analysis of metabolomics data generated by GC-MS Motivation: The Automated Mass Spectral Deconvolution and Identification System (AMDIS) is freeware extensively applied in metabolomics. However, datasets processed by AMDIS require extensive data correction, filtering and reshaping to create reliable datasets for further downstream analysis. Performed manually, these processes are laborious and extremely time consuming. Furthermore, manual corrections increase the chance of human error and can introduce additional technical variability to the data. Thus, an automated pipeline for curating GC-MS data is urgently needed. Results: We present the Metab R package designed to automate the pipeline for analysis of metabolomics GC-MS datasets processed by AMDIS. Availability: The Metab package, the AMDIS library and the reference ion library are available at www.metabolomics.auckland .ac.nz/index.php/downloads. ContactMetabolomics has grown extraordinarily quickly in the last decade and its laboratorial and analytical aspects are now considerably well-advanced . However, the same cannot be said for the data mining and analysis techniques needed to process the raw data generated by Gas ChromatograpyMass Spectrometry (GC-MS) in preparation for downstream analyses. While freely available web-based software tools (e.g. MeltDB and metaP) are available, they generally perform only a subset of the necessary data preprocessing steps. These partially processed data must, therefore, be further analyzed using other software(s). Most of these tools do not, however, allow users to create their own pipeline flux. Automated Mass Spectral Deconvolution and Identification System (AMDIS) is the most commonly used freeware for deconvoluting chromatograms generated by GC-MS and for identifying and quantifying metabolites in biological samples. However, it has three major limitations: selection of different mass fragments for quantification of the same compound, assignment of multiple compounds to the same retention time and results, generated in a layout that does not make the data amenable to further preprocessing and analysis .We have introduced a new R package, Metab, which automates the tasks commonly required for the analysis of metabolomics GC-MS datasets. Metab substantially increases throughput by substantially reducing the time normally required to perform these tasks manually and provides protection against human error. Furthermore, our interactive functions allow its usage by users with little knowledge of the R language. 
