Sequence analysis Analyzing marginal cases in differential shotgun proteomics We present an approach to statistically pinpoint differentially expressed proteins that have quantitation values near the quantitation threshold and are not identified in all replicates (marginal cases). Our method uses a Bayesian strategy to combine parametric statistics with an empirical distribution built from the reproducibility quality of the technical replicates. Availability: The software is freely available for academic use atShotgun proteomics describes a large-scale approach to analyzing complex peptide mixtures (i.e. mixtures originating from biological fluids, cell lysates, etc.). Briefly, the strategy is to perform protein digestion followed by peptide chromatographic separation online with tandem mass spectrometry (MS2) for protein identification . The study of complex mixtures is challenging in itself because peptides are under-sampled during data acquisition by mass spectrometry. The combined nature of sample complexity, data acquisition methodologies and under-sampling is bound to generate considerable experimental variation. Indeed, one may expect to observe some 25 additional uniquely identified proteins when comparing two technical replicates of a complex mixture . As we demonstrate below, this variation is largely due to peptide ions whose relative quantitation values lie near the detection threshold and therefore do not appear in all technical replicates (marginal cases). One of the goals of proteomics is to distinguish between various states of a biological system according to protein expression differences. By directly applying common statistical approaches to pinpoint differentially expressed proteins without taking the necessary precautions that are inherently related to technicalEach of Supplementary Figures 1A, B and C shows a Venn diagram (VD) of identified proteins from B 1 and B 2 appearing in at least one, at least two, and all three replicates, respectively. Supplementary Figures 2A and B show VDs comparing uniquely identified proteins among the technical replicates from B 1 and B 2 , respectively. Both Supplementary Figures 1 and 2 corroborate the great variability claimed by. The model described in Section 2 has been implemented as part of the PatternLab for proteomics suite . Results on the biological states to which Section 3 refers are shown in Supplementary Tables I and II, respectively, to verify differential expression in state B 1 relative to state B 2 and conversely (i.e. reversing the roles of the two states in the discussion of Section 2). Clearly, proteins that are more reproducible (appear in more replicates) yield lower p-values. The resulting algorithm was also incorporated into PatternLabs area-proportional VD module . The user can now choose between generating VDs by filtering proteins that appear in at least a certain number of replicates, or by using the new approach through a user-specified p-value. The new option can be used to eliminate proteins that cannot be claimed to be statistically differentially expressed. Supplementaryshows a VD that considers a p-value cutoff of 0.05 for the two biological states of Section 3, instead of the replicate-cutoff criterion used in Supplementary. 
