MetaQUAST: evaluation of metagenome assemblies During the past years we have witnessed the rapid development of new metagenome assembly methods. Although there are many benchmark utilities designed for single-genome assemblies, there is no well-recognized evaluation and comparison tool for metagenomic-specific analogues. In this article, we present MetaQUAST, a modification of QUAST, the state-of-the-art tool for genome assembly evaluation based on alignment of contigs to a reference. MetaQUAST addresses such metagenome datasets features as (i) unknown species content by detecting and downloading reference sequences, (ii) huge diversity by giving comprehensive reports for multiple genomes and (iii) presence of highly relative species by detecting chimeric contigs. We demonstrate MetaQUAST performance by comparing several leading assemblers on one simulated and two real datasets. Availability and implementation: http://bioinf.spbau.ru/metaquast.Metagenomics studies genetic material taken directly from environmental samples. NGS technologies allow for extracting short reads even from low abundant organisms without cloning. However, the data produced in such experiments tend to be enormous, noisy, and contain fragments from thousands of species highly varying in abundance and homology. Those challenges led to a new computational problem of metagenome assembly, followed by a diversity of methods , which demands a standard benchmark procedure. Most existing assembly evaluation approaches are not designed to work with metagenomes. However there exist methods which count read likelihoods with respect to the assembly , or determine single-copy conservative ubiquitous gene content . Unfortunately, none uses contig alignments to a closely related reference genome. In this article we present MetaQUAST, a metagenomic-specific improvement over QUAST . QUAST detects errors based on alignments to a given closely related reference genome, and also reports and plots contig statistics like N50 and gene content which gives an overview of constituent species even without user-supplied reference sequences. To address metagenome assemblies, MetaQUAST adds several new features: (i) ability of using an unlimited number of reference genomes, (ii) automated species content detection, (iii) detection of chimeric contigs (interspecies misassemblies) and (iv) significantly redesigned visualizations.We tested MetaQUAST on three datasets: the CAMI (http://camichallenge.org) simulated toy dataset, the MH0045 sample from MetaHit and the SRS077736 tongue dorsum female sample from HMP . We assembled these data using four leading assemblers commonly used in metagenomic studies: IDBA-UD , SPAdes , Ray Meta and SOAPdenovo2 . Comparisons results and MetaQUAST performance on all three datasets are demonstrated in Supplementary Material. The comparison on these datasets demonstrated that none of the assemblers can be called an undisputed leader in metagenomic assembly. Thus, tools such as MetaQUAST are of great practical importance for the community. It will help scientists to assess different assembly software and choose the best pipeline for their research. 
