MetaSV: an accurate and integrative structural-variant caller for next generation sequencing Structural variations (SVs) are large genomic rearrangements that vary significantly in size, making them challenging to detect with the relatively short reads from next-generation sequencing (NGS). Different SV detection methods have been developed; however, each is limited to specific kinds of SVs with varying accuracy and resolution. Previous works have attempted to combine different methods, but they still suffer from poor accuracy particularly for insertions. We propose MetaSV, an integrated SV caller which leverages multiple orthogonal SV signals for high accuracy and resolution. MetaSV proceeds by merging SVs from multiple tools for all types of SVs. It also analyzes soft-clipped reads from alignment to detect insertions accurately since existing tools underestimate insertion SVs. Local assembly in combination with dynamic programming is used to improve breakpoint resolution. Paired-end and coverage information is used to predict SV genotypes. Using simulation and experimental data, we demonstrate the effectiveness of MetaSV across various SV types and sizes. Availability and implementation: Code in Python is atSVs have been implicated in contributing to genomic diversity as well as genomic disorders . Therefore, a significant amount of work has been done on detecting SVs. Generally, a tool for detecting SVs uses one or more of the following signals from read alignments: split-read [reads with split alignments, e.g. Pindel (, read-pair [abnormal paired-end alignments, e.g. BreakDancer (, depthof-coverage [abnormal coverages, e.g. CNVnator (, junction-mapping [alignments to known SV breakpoints, e.g. BreakSeq2 (or assembly around potential breakpoints [e.g. MindTheGap (. However, there is no signal that comprehensively detects all types of SVs since each has a niche of SV types and sizes where it V C The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press.We demonstrate the effectiveness of MetaSV using the VarSim simulation and validation framework . Simulated 2 100 bp NGS reads were generated at 50 coverages for the NA12878 genome using published variant sets. The reads were aligned using BWA-MEM. For comparing reported SVs against the ground truth, we use a reciprocal overlap of 90 and a wiggle of 100 bp which captures accuracy at a high breakpoint resolution. The SV size cutoff was set to 100 bp since smaller variants are a target of indel callers such as GATKs HaplotypeCaller. Our results show that each method has varying performance in different SV size ranges. By integrating multiple methods, MetaSV achieved a steady performance across all sizes . We report accuracy as F1-score, which is the harmonic mean of sensitivity and precision. For this dataset, MetaSV achieved an F1-score of 96.2 (sensitivity and precision were 93.7 and 98.8, respectively) for deletions, indicating high accuracy and resolution. For insertions, it achieved an F1-score of 84.7 (sensitivity and precision were 85.3 and 84.1, respectively) comparing to less than 65 for all the individual tools analyzed. Insertion length was omitted from the accuracy analysis since long insertions cannot be assembled completely with NGS reads. Nevertheless, the significantly enhanced detection of insertion events can definitely improve interpretation largely as they may cause impactful disruption in the genome. Finally, genotyping accuracies of 95.2 and 95.5 were achieved for deletions and insertions, respectively.shows detailed accuracy comparisons for both deletion and insertion detection across different SV sizes and tools. For deletions , MetaSV performance was the highest across all SV sizes. In most cases, it improves upon the best performing individual tool for a given size. For insertions , the improvement due to MetaSV was more significant since all tools (with the exceptionTherefore, almost all improvement in accuracy is due to our insertion detection enhancementour soft-clip based approach is very sensitive while the assembly step for insertion detection yields high precision in contrast to Pindel which had low precision. As with deletions, small insertions are more difficult to detect, in general. Detailed accuracy comparisons for other SV types are discussed in the Supplementary Text. In order to study the impact on accuracy and runtime of varying coverages, we generated additional simulation datasets with 2 100 bp reads at 10 and 30 coverages. We also generated 2 250 bp reads at 50 coverage to investigate the impact of increasing read length for the same coverage. Although accuracy dropped for lower coverages, MetaSV was still the most stable and most accurate, with deletion F1-scores of 89.1 and 95.8 for 10 and 30 coverages, respectively. For 250 bp read length, F1-scores of 96.8 and 80.9 were achieved for deletions and insertions, respectivelyinsertion accuracy dropped slightly over 100 bp reads due to reduced read count for the same coverage. Furthermore, it took around 25 h to run all the four aforementioned tools for MetaSV as well as MetaSV on a single node with dual-hexcore X5675 Intel Xeon processors for 50 coverage. Because MetaSV is parallelized in all its steps, its speed should scale linearly with the number of available cores. In addition to simulation, we used the publicly available Illumina Platinum Genomes sequencing data for NA12878 as a real testbed. Due to the lack of high-confidence comprehensive SV calls, particularly for insertions, false positive rates cannot be accurately determined using real data. Therefore, only sensitivity for deletions was reported here. For deletions, a sensitivity of 90.2 was achieved against the Complete Genomics high-confidence callset for NA12878 generated using their analysis pipeline version 2.0, which is similar to our simulation results. Complete Genomics was used since it is an orthogonal sequencing platform, providing a less biased validation. 
