Sequence analysis MGAviewer: a desktop visualization tool for analysis of metagenomics alignment data Numerous metagenomics projects have produced tremendous amounts of sequencing data. Aligning these sequences to reference genomes is an essential analysis in metagenomics studies. Large-scale alignment data call for intuitive and efficient visualization tool. However, current tools such as various genome browsers are highly specialized to handle intraspecies mapping results. They are not suitable for alignment data in metagenomics, which are often interspecies alignments. We have developed a web browser-based desktop application for interactively visualizing alignment data of metagenomic sequences. This viewer is easy to use on all computer systems with modern web browsers and requires no software installation. Availability: http://weizhongliThe advances of Next Generation Sequencing technologies have promoted big waves of metagenomic projects in study of microbiomes under different environments such as ocean and human body . An essential step in metagenomic data analysis is to align the sequencing reads against the available microbial genomes. Visualization is an intuitive way to analyze large-scale alignment data in genomic studies. There are many visualization tools available. Some are web browser-based such as UCSC genome browser , LookSeq and JBrowse . Some are standalone programs such as Tablet , GenomeView , MapView , IGB , IGV , SamScope and so on. However, these sophisticated visualization tools are specialized in handling intraspecies alignment results (i.e. query and reference are same species). They are not suitable for interspecies alignments from metagenomic datasets, where query and reference can be from different species. There are fundamental differences between intraspecies and interspecies alignments. The former only involves one reference genome and represent features like single nucleotide polymorphism and alternative splicing. But the latter involves multiple (often 10 3 ) reference microbial genomes. To visualize interspecies alignments, a tool needs to show the wide range of alignment similarities (100 to as low as 50 for DNAs and 30 for proteins) and to handle thousands of reference genomes. The Global Ocean Sampling study first introduced fragment recruitment plots to illustrate the metagenomic alignment data. However, its underlying software is not available to the public. Here, we present MetaGenomic Alignment Viewer (MGAviewer), a platform-independent web browser-based tool for visualizing alignment data. It does not rely on web server and relational database for image generation and data retrieval. It can be simply used as a standalone desktop program to analyze local data. It can also be included in a web server like other web-based genome browsers.MGAviewer has an interface for users to select one or more metagenomic samples and a reference from a list of reference genomes to generate the plot. The screenshots of MGAviewer are shown in. The plot shows alignments from eight metagenomic samples to a reference genome. The x-axis is the genome coordinate, and y-axis is alignment identity . Alignments are coloured by sample and are represented as points or lines depending on zoom level. The bottom of the plot shows genes of the reference genome, and the top shows the genome coverage for each sample. Icons at left and right bottom corners are for zoom, resize and reset. Users can also zoom or pan the map by mouse. The inside circular images are zoomed views of the plot. We tested MGAviewer on 1.5 million alignment datasets between 4600 metagenomic samples from CAMERA and 42500 genomes from NCBI. MGAviewer provides real-time visualization for almost all these datasets except a few hundred very large datasets, which need extra several seconds for data loading and plotting. MGAviewer is already adopted by CAMERA project in its alignment resources, which will be described in a separate publication. MGAviewer can be used to analyze alignment data not only for prokaryotic species but also for viruses and small eukaryotic organisms. 
