Gene expression MGDB: crossing the marker genes of a user microarray with a database of public-microarrays marker genes The microarrays performed by scientific teams grow exponentially. These microarray data could be useful for researchers around the world, but unfortunately they are underused. To fully exploit these data, it is necessary (i) to extract these data from a repository of the high-throughput gene expression data like Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) and (ii) to make the data from different microarrays comparable with tools easy to use for scientists. We have developed these two solutions in our server, implementing a database of micro-array marker genes (Marker Genes Data Base). This database contains the marker genes of all GEO microarray datasets and it is updated monthly with the new microarrays from GEO. Thus, researchers can see whether the marker genes of their microarray are marker genes in other microarrays in the database, expanding the analysis of their microarray to the rest of the public microarrays. This solution helps not only to corroborate the conclusions regarding a researchers microarray but also to identify the phenotype of different subsets of individuals under investigation, to frame the results with microarray experiments from other species, pathologies or tissues, to search for drugs that promote the transition between the studied phenotypes, to detect undesirable side effects of the treatment applied, etc. Thus, the researcher can quickly add relevant information to his/her studies from all of the previous analyses performed in other studies as long as they have been deposited in public repositories.When our application crosses the marker genes of the users microarray sample clusters with the database of microarray marker genes, two types of lists are provided: List-of-microarrays view: The list of matching microarrays is ordered by the number of marker genes in common between the users microarray specific search and the matching microarrays. The list of microarrays can be filtered by the experimental variable, like agent, dose or time, to limit the search to a concrete scope, or by keywords like breast cancer. The common marker genes between the users microarray and each matching microarray can be analyzed in the list-of-marker-genes view. List-of-marker-genes view: The common marker genes between the two microarrays are listed. The cluster distribution along the gene expression is shown for each marker gene and both microarrays. In this way, the researcher can quickly establish the correspondence between the clusters of his/her own microarray and the public microarray. The more microarrays satisfactorily compared, the more attributes that can be assigned to the users microarray sample clusters, which could have been calculated by statistical methods and, thus, their biological significance be unknown. As a result, the user can enrich his/her microarray data analysis and sample clusters, improve his/her future experimental design and check the hypotheses generated from the data in the ways cited in the Section 1. 
