Minimum message length inference of secondary structure from protein coordinate data Motivation: Secondary structure underpins the folding pattern and architecture of most proteins. Accurate assignment of the secondary structure elements is therefore an important problem. Although many approximate solutions of the secondary structure assignment problem exist, the statement of the problem has resisted a consistent and mathematically rigorous definition. A variety of comparative studies have highlighted major disagreements in the way the available methods define and assign secondary structure to coordinate data. Results: We report a new method to infer secondary structure based on the Bayesian method of minimum message length inference. It treats assignments of secondary structure as hypotheses that explain the given coordinate data. The method seeks to maximize the joint probability of a hypothesis and the data. There is a natural null hypothesis and any assignment that cannot better it is unacceptable. We developed a program SST based on this approach and compared it with popular programs, such as DSSP and STRIDE among others. Our evaluation suggests that SST gives reliable assignments even on low-resolution structures.Periodic hydrogen-bonding patterns in globular proteins give rise to elements of secondary structurehelices and sheets. The -helix and -sheets were among the first structural motifs predicted from first principles of stereochemistry by. We now know these specific motifs are almost ubiquitous across the corpus of known structures. Eventually, other repetitive motifs were also identified, and the alphabet of secondary structures was expanded to include 3 10-helix, -helix, -turn, -turn,-turn and -bulges, among other minor elements. In what follows, we use the term secondary structure to include both the classical helices and sheets, and other common substructural elements. Accurate assignment of secondary structure of proteins from coordinate data is an important and a challenging problem . Secondary structure underpins the architectural organization in proteins. It simplifies the complex atom-level description of proteins and is therefore the key to generation of schematic diagrams of their three dimensional (3D) folding patterns . They are central in training methods geared for predicting secondary structure from To whom correspondence should be addressed. amino acid sequence . They form a linchpin to efficient methods for structural comparison and analysis . Over the last 30 years, many programs were developed to address the problem of assigning secondary structure to protein coordinate data. A broad classification can be made of the assignment strategies:(i) methods that use distance and angle profiles of local fragments; (ii) methods that detect hydrogen bonds between backbone atoms; (iii) methods that use 3D geometry of local fragments; and (iv) methods that approximate the backbone trace with a set of straight lines. The following reviews some of the major earlier contributions to the literature of this problem. Levitt andwere the first to generate an automatic method for secondary structure assignment, based on distance and dihedral angle profiles of C atoms over a sliding window of four residues. P-SEA is another method in this category which assigns secondary structural states using a short C distance mask and two C dihedral angle criteria. PROSS proposes an assignment based solely on backbone dihedral angles. Xtlsstr calculates backbone dihedral angles and distances and assigns secondary structural types that would be consistent with interactions of amide-amide groups observed from circular dichroism of a protein in ultraviolet range . More recently, PALSSE was designed to delineate protein structure into helices and strands, mainly using distance and torsion angle constraints to identify core elements which are later extended to longer segments. KAKSI is based on C distances and backbone dihedral angles and designed primarily to show concordance with the manual assignments found in the protein data bank (PDB). The most popular method in this space is Dictionary of Secondary Structure of Proteins (DSSP) developed by Kabsch and Sander (1983). DSSP is based on detecting hydrogen bonds between nitrogen and carbonyl groups along the protein polypeptide chain using a Coulomb approximation of the hydrogen-bond energy function . Many now consider this method a standard for secondary structural assignment . Since DSSP was published, several methods have been designed that rely on computing the hydrogen-bond energy between backbone atoms. STRIDE is among the successful variants of DSSP which uses a modified hydrogen-bond energy function as well as backbone dihedral angles to compute its assignment. SECSTR is another variant which improves the detection and assignment of helices which both DSSP and STRIDE have difficulty characterizing .Implementation: a program (SST) implementing the method described in the previous section has been developed in C ++ programming language. The program accepts protein coordinates in the Brookhaven PDB format and outputs the secondary structure assignment both at a segment level (stating the start and end point of each secondary structural segment) as well as at a residue level. The program also generates a PyMol script, which allows users to visualize the secondary stucture assignment. . Datasets and comparison methods: To study the performance of SST, we consider a dataset of 1737 PDB structures. These structures are the same as the dataset considered by, excluding the structures which have been deprecated or those structures that failed running on any one of the considered methods. (See below.) These structures are divided into four datasets: highresolution (HRes) dataset with 631 crystal structures solved to 1.7 or better; medium resolution (MRes) dataset with 582 crystal structures with resolution between 1.7 and 3 resolution; lowresolution (LRes) dataset with 306 structures with resolution 3 and finally, a dataset of 218 NMR structures. In this work, we mainly compare SST with DSSP and STRIDE exhaustively on the large structural dataset described earlier. Although there are other programs for secondary structure assignment, we had difficulty finding distributions that we could download. For those we managed to download, we could not install the programs due to unresolvable dependencies in their source code. However, we use a web server 2Struct , which allows manual submission of queries with a single point of access to a variety of secondary structure assignment methods beyond DSSP and STRIDE such as KAKSI , PALSSE , STICK , XtlSStr and P-SEA . To facilitate comparisons with other methods, we randomly selected 30 low-resolution structures from the LRes dataset and manually collected the secondary structure assignments from the server. The list of structures used in this experiment can be download from http:// www.csse.monash.edu.au/karun/sst.strands, respectively. In general, DSSP is conservative in assigning regular secondary structures resulting in shorter elements compared with output from STRIDE and SST. Examining the lengths of various secondary structural segments, we observe that the average length of a helix and strand segment assigned by SST is 12.1 and 6.1 residues, respectively. Unlike SST, which states the residue start and end points of each segment, computing the lengths of secondary structural elements from DSSP and STRIDEs output is problematic and error-prone .shows the comparison between SST, DSSP and STRIDE over high, medium, low resolution and NMR structures. To undertake this comparison, the assignments of the three programs are grouped into three classes: helix (of all types), strand and other. DSSP and STRIDE use similar methods for assignment based on detecting hydrogen bonds. Therefore, as one would expect, their assignments are highly similar. SST largely agrees with DSSP and STRIDE when assigning helices. Strands, however, show some disagreement. Visually examining several instances, we find that in many cases SST assigns longer strands than the other two methods. Agreement between strand assignments on NMR structures among the three methods is rather poor. Surprisingly, even DSSP and STRIDE differ enormously in this class even though their assignment methods are quite similar.extends the comparison of SST with other popular methods for assignment on low-resolution structures. The table shows the percentage agreement of secondary structural assignments between the methods. Consistent with previous comparative studies , we see considerable differences in the assignments. In the absence of a universally acknowledged gold standard for assignment, it becomes very difficult (if not impossible) to objectively validate one method to be truly better than the other. The observed differences mainly arise from the different criteria used by the methods. However, i103manually examining many cases where the methods differ, we find that most disagreements appear at the ends of various (helical or strand) segments. We will use a simple example to highlight the most common type of differences.gives the overall residuelevel secondary structure assignment across different methods for a flavodoxin structure from Clostridium beijerinckii (wwPDB ID:5NLL). DSSP and STRIDE assignments are nearly identical to each other. From the figure, small disagreements between methods can be seen around the start and end points of various segments demarcated by SSTs segment view (labelled SST(SEG)). A major difference between DSSP and SST is the region Lys28...Asn34, which SST assigns as a strand. DSSP starts the segment three residues further at Asn31. Inspecting the structure, we find a backbone hydrogen bond between Asp29 and Met1. This might suggest the start of the strand at either Asp29 or one residue upstream at Lys28 as identified by SST. Also, in the region Glu62...Ile73, only SST correctly assigns a -helical cap (Glu62...Phe66) leading into a -helix. To evaluate the consistency of SSTs secondary structural assignments on coordinates solved at different resolutions, we randomly selected 15 protein structures for which both the superseded low-resolution coordinates and the new high-resolution coordinates were available.gives the list of considered structures along with the percentage agreement between SSTs assignment at different resolutions. The results indicate that SST produces consistent results on structures determined at different resolutions. The 10 differences (, last column) in agreement on the chosen structures may well represent genuine structural differences rather than shortcomings of the algorithm. Further, to illustrate the reliable segmentation produced by SST on structures with long, curved helices and strands, we chose two structures: Leucine zipper protein (wwPDB: 1NKP) composed of very long helices and Sucrose-specific porin protein(wwPDB: 1A0S) composed of long, curved strands forming barrels. Although SST initially breaks the curved segments into smaller pieces, the post-processing step explained in Section 5 reconstitutes these pieces back correctly into fuller segments. [information as the coordinates of other atoms are needed to decipher Hydrogen bonds. KAKSI and XtlSStr are able to process this structure but assign all residues in the chain to coil. Of the considered methods, only SST, PALSSE and STICK assigned any secondary structure. For lack of space, the overall residue-level assignment across these three methods are presented inof the supplementary text. Examining the structure, PALSSE consistently overestimates the regular secondary structural regions by a large margin. STICK performs well, especially in identifying -strands. However, it miscalculates several secondary structural elements. In comparison, SST produced the most reasonable segmentation of the three methods on visual inspection of the structure.Reliable secondary structure assignment is an important problem. We have developed a novel information theoretic method to address this problem using the Bayesian framework of MML inference. Careful examination of the results over a large number of structures suggests that our method gives consistent assignments even on lowresolution data. We note that our method uses a dictionary of models composed of ideal secondary structural elements. The details of the models are explicit and open to scrutiny. It is likely that these models can be improved. (Essentially, all models are wrong, but some are useful.George Box.) However, modification to the models is an improvement if, and only if, it yields extra compression. 
