Sequence analysis MMuFLR: missense mutation and frameshift location reporter Motivation: Cancer researchers seeking immunotherapy targets in cancer cells need tools to locate highly expressed proteins unique to cancer cells. Missense mutation and frameshift location reporter (MMuFLR), a Galaxy-based workflow, analyzes next-generation sequencing paired read RNA-seq output to reliably identify small frameshift mutations and missense mutations in highly expressed protein coding genes. MMuFLR ignores known SNPs, low quality reads and poly-A/T sequences. For each frameshift and missense mutation identified, MMuFLR provides the location and sequence of the amino acid substitutions in the novel protein candidates for direct input into epitope evaluation tools.Next-generation sequencing (NGS) holds promise for individualized targeted treatment, particularly in the realm of cancer immunotherapy . Identifying aberrant transcripts from a patients tumor cells may provide candidate target epitopes, which can be used to generate patient-specific vaccines. Given the quantity of data generated by NGS, it is important to have an efficient and repeatable process to deconstruct the data and present the most relevant vaccine targets, which includes missense and small frameshift mutations located in proteincoding regions of highly expressed genes. We offer missense mutation and frameshift location reporter (MMuFLR) as a process to analyze NGS RNA-seq paired read output to identify a limited set of peptides that may be targets for immunotherapy. MMuFLR is implemented as a workflow in Galaxy . Galaxy is a server-based workflow system designed to run a series of applications, presented to the user as tools, in an easy-to-use repeatable manner. MMuFLR uses a few custom-developed Galaxy tools and those in the standard distribution of Galaxy. In this pilot project, MMuFLRs ability to identify potential vaccine targets was tested in RNA-seq datasets derived from two benign human meningiomas. However, the use of MMuFLR is not limited to cancer immunotherapy. It can also be used to locate prominent mutations responsible for cancer development and for other maladies, such as genetic diseases, developmental defects and drug resistance.MMuFLR was executed for two human meningioma RNA-seq datasets, MG1 and MG2. MMuFLR settings restricted the selection of candidate genes with minimum coverage of five reads, with a prevalence 40.32 and a Phred quality score of 20 or more. MMuFLR also ignored poly A/T mononucleotide sequences of 5. MMuFLR identified 16 frameshifts and 576 missense mutations in the MG1 sample, and 10 frameshifts and 509 missense mutations in the MG2 sample. The candidates were evaluated for their presence in other samples. Sanger sequencing of nine prominent candidates, not found in other cancer samples, verified the existence of the mutations within the tumor samples, with the MMuFLR prevalence accurately reflecting the relative abundance of the mutation within the total transcripts present . Because there were no normal samples available for comparison, these mutations may represent rare germline variants. 
