Modeling associations between genetic markers using Bayesian networks Motivation: Understanding the patterns of association between polymorphisms at different loci in a population (linkage disequilibrium, LD) is of fundamental importance in various genetic studies. Many coefficients were proposed for measuring the degree of LD, but they provide only a static view of the current LD structure. Generative models (GMs) were proposed to go beyond these measures, giving not only a description of the actual LD structure but also a tool to help understanding the process that generated such structure. GMs based in coalescent theory have been the most appealing because they link LD to evolutionary factors. Nevertheless, the inference and parameter estimation of such models is still computationally challenging. Results: We present a more practical method to build GM that describe LD. The method is based on learning weighted Bayesian network structures from haplotype data, extracting equivalence structure classes and using them to model LD. The results obtained in public data from the HapMap database showed that the method is a promising tool for modeling LD. The associations represented by the learned models are correlated with the traditional measure of LD D. The method was able to represent LD blocks found by standard tools. The granularity of the association blocks and the readability of the models can be controlled in the method. The results suggest that the causality information gained by our method can be useful to tell about the conservability of the genetic markers and to guide the selection of subset of representative markers. Availability: The implementation of the method is available upon request by email. Contact: maciel@sc.usp.brThe detection of linkage disequilibrium (LD), the non-random association of alleles at different loci in a population, and the assessing of its intensity, extent and distribution is a fundamental step in many genetic studies. In association studies, for example, the search for the locus (or loci) responsible of a particular trait or disease is narrowed to regions of high LD (LD blocks) where genotyped genetic markers were observed to be associated with the studied phenotype . In population genetic, LD patterns has been widely used to study the evolutionary and demographic processes in a variety of animal and plant populations, such as admixtures, migration and natural selection . LD information was also useful to learn more about the architecture of the human genome and its biology of recombination . To whom correspondence should be addressed. A variety of coefficients have been proposed to quantify the intensity of LD (see Mueller, 2004 for a review). Pairwise LD measures were the first ones reported for this purpose, which measure the overall allele association between two loci. Popular examples of such measures are D and r 2 . Subsequently, multi-locus LD coefficients were proposed to measure simultaneous allele associations among multiple loci. Classical examples are the I A index and the coefficient H . Recently, information theory was used to develop new LD coefficients. Some examples are: the coefficent , based in entropy ; the normalized mutual information (MIR) coefficient ; and the normalized relative entropy (ER) coefficient . This active search of LD coefficients has been accompanied with the development of various tools that display LD measures in a comprehensive way. Examples of those tools are: GOLDsurfer , Haploview and LdCompare . This remarkable interest in developing new measures and tools for studying LD can be explained by the dramatic increase of public genotype data [from the HapMap project , for example], which at the same time enabled association studies in a whole-genome scale that presented new statistical and computational challenges due to the vast quantity of data collected. Although some of the aforementioned LD measures and tools were useful in characterizing LD at various genomic regions of several populations, they are limited to provide a static view of the LD structure in the studied region. In an attempt to go beyond these measures some generative models (GMs) were proposed . GMs are useful because they model the process that generate the observed data, providing the machinery to do inferences and simulations of yet unobserved situations or to help understanding the underlying generative process. Models based in coalescent theory have been the most appealing GMs because they relate LD to evolutionary factors, such as recombination rate, migration and mutation. However, the parameter estimation and inference in such models is still computationally challenging and only applicable to short regions . A more practical alternative to model LD is to learn probabilistic graphical models (PGMs) directly from the observed genotype or haplotype data, as proposed by Thomas and Camp (2004). PGM are a type of GMs that have proven to be useful in modeling a variety of complex real-world problems mainly due to the following reasons: intuitive interpretability of the models, their ability to encode the joint probability distribution with a reduced number of parameters and the existence of efficient methods to learn PGM from data and to make inferences. Because the learningPage: i633 i632i637The described method was implemented in the C++ programming language and tested in a 64-bit 2-core (2.1 GHz) computer with 4 GB of RAM, running a Linux operating system. The graph drawing was performed using the Graph Visualization Software (www.graphviz.org). To test the ability of the proposed approach in characterizing LD, we used public data registered in the HapMap database . We chose three genomic segment located in ENCODE 1 regions of different chromosomes and different populations, as shown in. ENCODE regions were chosen due to their high density of genotyped SNPs markers and to the availability of existing studies in such regions . The segments were selected increasing their size and complexity of the LD patterns (Figs 4, 5 and 6), aiming to test the method in different situations. The datasets were obtained from the HapMap repository, version III release 2, via the Genome Browser web application (http://hapmap.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov) using the option Download Phased Haplotype Data. The SNP markers with minor allele frequency (MAF) 0.03 were discarded, since they have little polymorphism. The following set of parameters were introduced to the learning method in all tests: population size = 20, couples in the mating pool = 10, crossover rate = 0.95, mutation rate = 0.05, number of replacement individuals in each generation = 10, number of generations = 300, maximum number of parents a node may have u = SNPs1. For clarity and space, we first detail the results for the ENm010_CHB+JPT dataset and then present summarized results for the other datasets.shows the evolution of the best fitness and average fitness of the BN structures learned from the ENm010_CHB+JPTThese datasets were obtained from the HapMap repository (version III, release 2) using the Genome Browser web application (http://hapmap.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov). Only SNPs with MAF 0.03 were considered.dataset. Only the first 20 generations are shown, since the curves remain unchanged in subsequent generations. As can be observed, the first optimal BN structure is found at the fifth generation. Six generations later the entire population converged to only optimal BN structures (the average fitness stabilizes at its maximum value). This can be considered a fast convergence, since it is reached in approximately the first 4 of the total number of generations. We use a predefined high number of generations as a stopping criterion because we were interested in exploring the topological diversity of optimal BN structures to get equivalence classes (PDAGs). All the optimal learned DAGs (a total of 5800 DAGs from generations 11 to 300) were analyzed. Twelve different DAGs were identified in that set, which were grouped into four different PDAGs, each having 31 edges. One of these PDAGs is shown in. The other PDAGs are similar to this figure, differing only in the location of three edges. For each of these PDAGs was determined the set of pairwise marker associations. No difference was found between these four sets of pairwise associations. As can be observed, two association blocks were identified in the PDAG, which are consistent with the two LD blocks (Block1 and Block 2) found in the triangular LD plot by the Haploview tool using the Strong LD Spine block definition . With the aim to knowing how the associations and association blocks are affected with the elimination of weak edges, we perform two experiments in the PDAG of. In the first experiment, the edges with strengths lower than the first quartile (the lower quartile) were eliminated. The resulting PDAG is shown inwith 23 edges. There was no alteration either in the set of pairwise associations or in the association blocks (these blocks are also indicated with line segments at the top of the LD plot of).The segmeted lines All, Q1 and Q2 at the top represent the association blocks found in the original PDAG, the PDAG with the first quartile of edges removed and the PDAG with the second quartile of edges removed, respectively.In the second experiment, the edges with strengths lower than the second quartile (the worst half of edges) were eliminated. The resulting PDAG is shown in. In this case the number of pairwise associations fell from 63 to 49, but the association blocks remained unchanged. This preservation of the association blocks with the removal of significant number of edges can be due to the high compaction of the LD blocks. A summary of results of executing the method in all datasets can be found in. It can be observed that the convergence generation increases with the number of markers, as well as the processing time. This is an expected result, since the search space is bigger and more complex. Like the results in the ENm010_CHB+JPT dataset, the four PDAGs obtained from the ENr131_CEU dataset and the three PDAGs obtained from the ENr321_YRI dataset represent the same set of pairwise associations and the same association blocks. These blocks are illustrated as segmented lines with the name All at the top ofand 6, respectively. As can be noticed, the association blocks represented in the PDAGs considering all edges tend to be generous, grouping large quantity of nodes into few blocks, including in such blocks markers with moderate to low D values. When the lower quartile of edges is removed, the association blocks are splitted into more compact blocks (line segments Q1). When the second lower quartile of edges is removed the association blocks (line segments Q2) tend to be more segmented and similar to that found by the Strong LD Spine block definition. It is interesting to know the relationship between the learned associations represented by the PDAGs and the classical measure of LD D. For this end, Figures 7a, b and c shows the distributionsof the associations with respect to 10 equally spaced intervals of D for the three datasets, respectively. It is possible to observe a clear trend in the three datasets to represent associations with high D values (in the interval). When edges are pruned at first quartile, the distributions of the represented associations are almost unchanged. When the second quartile of edges are removed the association distributions are moderately altered, predominantly in the lower intervals of D. This means that weak edges are important components of weak D associations, and vice versa. The learned PDAGs showed another interesting information: the markers most central in the blocks tend to have more outgoing edges (e.g. markers 4 and 24 in all PDAGs of) and the markers on the block boundaries tend to have predominantly incoming edges (markers 1, 13, 19 and 27 in all PDAGs of). An explanation for this behavior is that genetic markers near the center of the blocks are highly conserved in the population (had minimal recombination), which is reflected in the learned models by their tendency to be more causative than dependent nodes. This suggests that the causal information gained by BN models can be useful to tell about the conservability of the genetic markers in the analyzed population. The learned causal information can also be useful to guide the selection of an informative subset of tags markers, since nodes that have predominantly outgoing edges can explain the allele status of their dependent markers, being good candidates as tag markers. i636Page: i637 i632i637 
