Modeling sample variables with an Experimental Factor Ontology Motivation: Describing biological sample variables with ontologies is complex due to the cross-domain nature of experiments. Ontologies provide annotation solutions; however, for cross-domain investigations, multiple ontologies are needed to represent the data. These are subject to rapid change, are often not interoperable and present complexities that are a barrier to biological resource users. Results: We present the Experimental Factor Ontology, designed to meet cross-domain, application focused use cases for gene expression data. We describe our methodology and open source tools used to create the ontology. These include tools for creating ontology mappings, ontology views, detecting ontology changes and using ontologies in interfaces to enhance querying. The application of reference ontologies to data is a key problem, and this work presents guidelines on how community ontologies can be presented in an application ontology in a data-driven way.The description of experimental variables, even within a single discipline, involves the use of many cross-domain concepts. For example, describing the characteristics of a single sample in an experiment can use terminology from cell biology, proteomics, transcriptomics, disease, anatomy and environmental science. This is not a new problem and it is not restricted to bioinformatics. However, it is pressing within this domain due to the quantity of heterogeneous data available in different formats across multiple resources . The desire to integrate data generated with different experimental technologies and in different biological domains motivates our work. Experimental descriptions are captured and made available as text within database records, published papers and web site content. These descriptions contain latent semantic information that is hard to extract and reflects the natural language of the domain. One solution to this problem is the use of a controlled vocabulary to describe the data. With this approach, the terminology used in a particular context is restricted to a set of terms that define important aspects of a domain or application. Ontology adds an extra layer of expressivity by To whom correspondence should be addressed. structuring this vocabulary into ontological classes and by specifying the sorts of operations that can be performed on them. Importantly, the ontological models produced from this process are expressed in a language that enables human understanding and computational reasoning over the representation. Languages such as the W3C recommendation Web Ontology Language (OWL) aid interoperability by standardizing the syntax across all domains. Advantageously, validation of this OWL representation can also be performed through the use of description logic reasoners . In bioinformatics, the interest in ontologies to model domain knowledge is apparent from the steadily increasing number of groups developing them. In an attempt to align these efforts, the OBO Foundry provides useful guidance on best practice for developing ontologies in the biomedical domain. This includes the creation of orthogonal reference ontologies, from which classes are considered defining units of the area they describe. Although this is a worthwhile longer term aim, the state of the art is that existing ontologies are not orthogonal or interoperable, and many present a focus that is unsuitable for gene expression data. They can, however, be used to construct application ontologies that focus on describing and structuring a data space for a particular application. While a vision of full interoperability between ontologies overcomes some of the barriers to integration, there still remain unresolved issues for data-driven applications. Cross products, i.e. classes composed of two or more existing classes (formally in OWL, the intersection of two or more classes), are required between existing ontologies to more accurately describe omics data. For example, a cell type in a given tissue or the transcription factors within a pathway activated in a disease state. Few cross products are available to date partly because many ontologies do not use a common upper level ontology. Where there are non-orthogonal ontologies, those that best describe a dataset of interest typically do not have the necessary cross products. Furthermore, combining even ontologies that are interoperable can present problems. Ontologies such as FMA contain tens of thousands of classes, combined with other ontologies such as Gene Ontology (GO) and Disease Ontology , and this presents a large model to consider; this is a particular problem if description logic reasoners are used for consistency checking and inference. The use of multiple ontologies to annotate experimental data brings with it a considerable overhead. Consider an annotation example, where a biological user submitting data needs the term lymphoma. BioPortal returns 629 matches from 24 ontologies. The casual user is not equipped to select from theseThe diversity of experiments captured in the Gene Expression Atlas and ArrayExpress provides a wide range of experimental variables. A typical experiment includes factors such as disease, anatomical parts, developmental stage, species and chemical compounds. Within these experimental factors, there is additional knowledge that we capture to support our use cases. Consider the query, retrieve all data for cancer cell line samples. This query requires more than just samples in the database which have been annotated with cancer and with a cell line. The query is more accurately expressed as cell lines that are derived from some diseased sample. We therefore add logical relations between classes in the context of EFO; these can serve as OBO Foundry integration use cases. An example of some of the existential restrictions between classes is shown in. The ability to explicitly express richer statements of knowledge (such as the example above) is one of the major advantages of using ontologies; however, with increased complexity comes increased possibility of contradiction and inconsistent expression. To help manage this issue, we chose to use the Web Ontology Language , the recommendation for representing knowledge with formally defined meaning. Using the OWL-DL flavor of the language, we are able to create axiomatic statements about classes, and use the Pellet 1.5.2 description logic reasoner to ensure the ontology is consistent, i.e. class membership is axiomatically correct and there are no contradictions in the model. OWL also offers the ability to create equivalent classes (often called defined classes) which are useful for inferring hierarchies and managing multiple inheritance. Considering the previous example of the EFO class cancer cell line, this is defined in OWL as any class which has the bearer_of some cancer axiom. In other words, any cell line which bears the disease cancer will be inferred to be a subclass of this type. Here we illustrate some of these examples from our application.In this article, we present EFO, an application ontology driven by the annotation and query needs of samples in omics datasets. Our approach to ontology engineering uses the many existing reference bio-ontologies while allowing us to develop a hierarchy that supports our use cases. EFO enables queries of the data that were not previously possible because we add value to existing ontologies by adding explicit relations and because we have adopted a datadriven methodology. Furthermore, EFO separates knowledge from the experimental data, is reusable and easy to maintain; when modification to the knowledge is required, modification to the data is not. We believe the methodology and tools present a reproducible and maintainable strategy to create ontological solutions for a particular application focus. EFO has also proven to be useful for text mining annotation of gene expression datasets and has been used in data mining. An EFO-R package that facilitates such analysis is currently under development. Essentially EFO represents a custom view of several domainspecific ontologies. We believe that use of ontology views will help end users to understand and use ontologies. An advantage of EFO for ArrayExpress staff is that they do not need specialist domain knowledge of multiple ontologies and are able to apply EFO consistently to data, while users typically do not perform well as annotators. Ideally, views should contain a subset of the ontology that is still logically consistent containing only classes, instances and properties that are desirable. The requirements of a view are likely to be driven by particular applications and user communities as described here. Improved tools that support the creation and use of views will help the users of bioinformatic resources overcome one of the largest obstacles of using ontologies: that the learning curve is extremely steep and the climb is a disincentive to users. There is a great deal of useful work presently under way within the bio-ontology community. However, it is impractical and undesirable to import, wholesale, ontologies that touch upon many domains and expect users to apply them consistently. Guidelines on development of application ontologies and appropriate reuse of existing resources would be useful. In particular, maintenance and mapping of original ontology identifiers and development of public domain tools are important. Similarly, there are several important challenges facing reference ontologies. One of the most challenging is mapping anatomy between multiple species. This is not in scope for EFO and we look forward to consuming such reference ontologies, but application data should inform some of this work. Our work with ontologies is focused on enabling us to do novel research with the experimental data we have, such as answer more complex questions and integrate multiple data sources. In this respect, ontologies are a means to an end; our work here is based on describing experimental data, and we believe this should be the driving force behind ontology development and consumption. Future work will develop an RDF triple store representation of Atlas and provide federated querying using SPARQL end points. An ontology-enabled annotation application for functional genomics dataAnnotare (code.google.com/p/annotare/ ) is being collaboratively developed, which allows users and curators to select terms from multiple ontologies, including EFO. We hope this will expose users to ontologies in a user-friendly way and help provide better annotated datasets. 
