MSA-PAD: DNA multiple sequence alignment framework based on PFAM accessed domain information Here we present the MSA-PAD application, a DNA multiple sequence alignment framework that uses PFAM protein domain information to align DNA sequences encoding either single or multiple protein domains. MSA-PAD has two alignment options: gene and genome mode. Availability and Implementation: MSA-PAD is available as a web application (https://recasgate way.ba.infn.it/) and as two Taverna workflows corresponding to two alignment modes (Gene modeMultiple sequence alignment (MSA) is one of the oldest problems in bioinformatics and represents a key step in sequence analysis applications such as phylogenetic inference and comparative genomics. Algorithms such as translatorX and tranalign (EMBOSS;), taking advantage of the higher conservation of proteins than their respective coding sequences, use the protein alignment to guide the reconstruction of accurate MSAs at nucleotide level. However, these methods do not make use of information embedded in protein domains. Moreover, when applied to genomic sequences, such approaches account neither for intron occurrence nor for gene order variations (e.g. mitochondrial genomes; DOnorio) resulting in apparently truncated protein domains or variations in their arrangement along the genome regions under investigation. Here we present a DNA MSA framework (MSA-PAD), which conceptually translates DNA sequences into amino acids (based on user-defined genetic code and reading frame/s), uses information from conserved PFAM domains to assign the translated sequences to known protein domains, accounts for frameshifts when domain regions are split by introns, performs a domain-based protein alignment and then uses protein alignment information to generate the relevant nucleotide multiple alignment. The final MSA can be generated following two different strategies: (i) Gene and (ii) Genome mode. Gene mode alignment respects domain order organization from 5 0 to 3 0 , and resolves the alignment of repetitive domains even when they are repeated in tandem. Genome mode alignment provides a super-gene-like alignment ignoring domain order constraints.We evaluated the ability of MSA-PAD to assign sequence fragments to the correct domain block. The alignment within blocks was not assessed given that it is entirely determined by the hmmalign algorithm . The case studies consisted of mitochondrial genomes exhibiting either conserved or varied gene order, genes containing introns, sequences encoding repeated domains, genes demonstrating intron loss/gain and ORFs encoding single protein domains. We evaluated MSA-PAD for protein sequence identity compared with the reference, protein sequence assignment to the correct PFAM domain, the order of domain blocks mergedwith particular reference to repeated domains (in Gene Mode) and the uniqueness of these domains (in Genome Mode). Our results show that MSAPAD correctly translated DNA sequences, assigned them to the right PFAM domains (no false positive assignments) and assembled them as expected in both Gene and Genome modes (Supplementary). The unique feature of MSA-PAD compared to other methods (e.g. TranslatorX, tranalign) is that it is able to automatically generate an accurate MSA even where frameshifts or introns are present in the input sequences. Furthermore, it is able to generate a supergene-like alignment when input sequences contain multiple genes (e.g. complete mitochondrial genome sequences). However, MSA-PAD may have some limitations when no PFAM domain match is found for the input sequences or when a matched domain fragment is too short (e.g. in the case of a short exon) to produce a significant alignment score. 
