Multifactor dimensionality reduction for graphics processing units enables genome-wide testing of epistasis in sporadic ALS Motivation: Epistasis, the presence of genegene interactions, has been hypothesized to be at the root of many common human diseases, but current genome-wide association studies largely ignore its role. Multifactor dimensionality reduction (MDR) is a powerful model-free method for detecting epistatic relationships between genes, but computational costs have made its application to genome-wide data difficult. Graphics processing units (GPUs), the hardware responsible for rendering computer games, are powerful parallel processors. Using GPUs to run MDR on a genome-wide dataset allows for statistically rigorous testing of epistasis. Results: The implementation of MDR for GPUs (MDRGPU) includes core features of the widely used Java software package, MDR. This GPU implementation allows for large-scale analysis of epistasis at a dramatically lower cost than the standard CPU-based implementations. As a proof-of-concept, we applied this software to a genome-wide study of sporadic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS). We discovered a statistically significant two-SNP classifier and subsequently replicated the significance of these two SNPs in an independent study of ALS. MDRGPU makes the large-scale analysis of epistasis tractable and opens the door to statistically rigorous testing of interactions in genome-wide datasets. Availability: MDRGPU is open source and available free of charge from http://www.sourceforge.net/projects/mdr.Genome-wide association studies hold promise for the discovery of the genetic factors that underlie common human diseases . Unfortunately this promise has largely not been realized . It is thought that this failure could be due to epistasis, the role of genegene interactions, which has commonly been ignored in these studies. Powerful and model-free methods such as multifactor dimensionality reduction (MDR) have been developed , but an exhaustive examination of even pair-wise interactions in a 550 000 SNP dataset would require the analysis of 1.510 11 combinations. While an analysis of this scale is approachable with modern cluster computing, an analysis that includes permutation testing to assess the statistical significance of results remains infeasible with CPU-based approaches. Rendering photo-realistic video games in real time is also computationally difficult. For video game graphics, specific hardware (the graphics processing unit or GPU) has been developed. The GPU is a massively parallel computing platform that can be adapted to some scientific tasks. We have previously shown that MDR is one of these tasks . Here we provide software which makes practical the analysis of epistasis in genome-wide data through the use of GPUs and demonstrate its application to a genome-wide analysis of epistasis of sporadic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).Page: 695 694695Our three GPU systems completed an analysis of pairwise interactions in a single permutation approximately every 6 min. The time to analyze the dataset itself for pairwise interactions is the same as the time required for one permutation. One thousand permutations were used to assess statistical significance which required 100 h. The time to analyze the same dataset on a cluster with 200 AMD Opteron 2384 (2.7 GHz) CPU cores was just over 1 h without permutation testing and thus a CPU-based permutation test was considered infeasible as the estimated time required on 200 CPU cores was 40 days. In the proof-of-concept analysis, the highest accuracy combination in our dataset was SNPs rs4363506 and rs6014848 with a balanced accuracy of 0.6551. In our permutation test, this accuracy was statistically significant (P 0.048). In the replication dataset this pair had a balanced accuracy of 0.5821. Permutation testing the replication dataset showed that this result was also statistically significant (P 0.021). Therefore, not only have we discovered a statistically significant pair of SNPs using an experiment-wise of 0.05, but we have replicated the significant relationship in an independent dataset. Here is evidence of how the permutation testing allowed by MDRGPU enables the discovery of combinations of SNPs that are significantly associated with a disease.While SNP rs4363506 has been reported as associated with disease in, it did not have a statistically significant effect inwhen considered alone ( 2 , P = 0.18) and would have failed to replicate without considering pairwise effects. SNP rs6014848 has not previously been described as associated with sporadic ALS, although it shows main effects (uncorrected 2 , P 0.05) in both datasets.have shown that SNPs can fail to replicate a significant association when the joint effect of those SNPs is ignored. This is particularly likely when the populations from which patients are ascertained differs.collected individuals from the USA, whilecollected individuals from Ireland. By considering the joint effect of SNPs, MDRGPU discovers a novel association which replicates in an independent dataset. GPUs provide a platform for epistasis analysis in genome-wide data where computational requirements far exceed what CPUs can cost-effectively provide. MDRGPU is a software package for this emerging computing platform that enables human geneticists to tackle analyses previously found to be intractable. 
