Genetics and population analysis MultiMeta: an R package for meta-analyzing multi-phenotype genome-wide association studies As new methods for multivariate analysis of genome wide association studies become available, it is important to be able to combine results from different cohorts in a meta-analysis. The R package MultiMeta provides an implementation of the inverse-variance-based method for meta-analysis, generalized to an n-dimensional setting. Availability and implementation: The R package MultiMeta can be downloaded from CRAN.Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have been a powerful tool for genetic discovery for almost a decade. Results have shed light on many different biological processes from lipid metabolism to blood composition as well as social and behavioral patterns (, www.genome.gov/gwastudies.). A key to the success of GWAS was the ability to combine several studies in a meta-study, which allowed sufficiently large sample sizes for powered association studies even for variants of small phenotypic effect. Although typically GWAS test one phenotype at a time, many biological features are better described by a combination of several variables. Thus, addressing multiple phenotypes can give great increase in power, by taking into account the underlying correlations between variables. Multivariate regression is a straightforward generalization of standard GWAS, where a linear multivariate mixed model can be fit and allows controlling for population stratification and relatedness . In particular, a new set of algorithms included in the GEMMA software allows for a fast multivariate fitting and testing up to 10 phenotypes in large sample sizes. As for the univariate GWAS, it might be desirable in some settings to be able to combine multivariate results from different studies to further increase statistical power in genotypephenotype associations. Here, we describe a novel statistically efficient method to perform meta-analysis in a multivariate setting. It is an inversevariance-based method that allows different weights for each cohort to take into account the accuracy of each effect estimate. The inversevariance method has been successfully used for single-trait association testing and is suitable for n-dimensional generalization. Finally, it is implemented as part of the R package MultiMeta to benefit from flexible environment and open access, as well as extra plotting functions for results visualization.The method was implemented as part of the R package MultiMeta, together with plotting functions useful for visual representation of the results, including Manhattan plot, quantilequantile plot and an overview plot of effect sizes for a chosen SNP. The default options for the meta-analysis function multi_meta are set to work with GEMMA file format (multivariate analysis option). The plotting functions work with output files from the multi_meta function by default. However, both can be easily adapted to deal with different file formats by changing options, such as field separators, or by changing column names, as specified in the manual. Furthermore, the plotting functions can be run by passing files and objects in input. This choice is meant to provide more flexibility and avoid unnecessary opening of large files. Example datasets with only few SNPs are included in the package and can be analyzed as detailed in the instruction manual. To test the software, we analyzed UK10K data (two cohorts, total sample size 3621) on six lipid-related traits: apolipoprotein A (ApoA), apolipoprotein B, high-density lipids (HDL), low-density lipids, triglycerides and total cholesterol (Supplementary). Results were compared with univariate GWAS meta-analysis on the same sample . Seven known associations were confirmed. Interestingly, two of these (LIPC and PLTP) did not reach genomewide significance in the univariate GWAS meta-analysis in our sample but did using the multi-trait approach, clearly showing a gain in power with the latter. Conversely, the multivariate analysis did not detect one locus on chromosome 11, suggesting that a single test is not necessarily the most powerful and that the two approaches should be complementary . Supplementaryshows the plot obtained with betas_plot function for one of the significant SNPs. The meta-analysis runs on very low memory with default options (e.g. RAM 250 Mb for two cohorts). Computation time is $0.07 s/SNP for two cohorts and it grows linearly with the addition of other cohorts in input. As each SNP is analyzed singularly, overall computation time depends linearly on the total number of SNPs. By changing settings to increase the dimension of regions in which the genome is divided (see manual), it is possible to increase the performance, while allocating more memory. The package is freely available on CRAN repository and can be run on any operating system.Chr, chromosome; single trait analysis, which trait in the univariate GWAS showed the strongest association for the SNP; LDL, low-density lipid; TG, triglycerides; ApoB, apolipoprotein B. aOnly previously reported SNPs are shown (www.genome.gov/gwastudies). 
