Databases and ontologies myChEMBL: a virtual machine implementation of open data and cheminformatics tools myChEMBL is a completely open platform, which combines public domain bioactivity data with open source database and cheminformatics technologies. myChEMBL consists of a Linux (Ubuntu) Virtual Machine featuring a PostgreSQL schema with the latest version of the ChEMBL database, as well as the latest RDKit cheminformatics libraries. In addition, a self-contained web interface is available, which can be modified and improved according to user specifications. Availability and implementation: The VM is available at:The past decade has seen a dramatic increase in the number of informatics tools enabling the efficient analysis of the large chemical, biological and clinical datasets currently being produced by both academic institutions and pharmaceutical companies in the context of drug discovery . This was partly catalyzed by the development of freely accessible repositories containing expertly curated and annotated medicinal chemistry and chemical biology data. For example, the ChEMBL database is a public domain chemogenomics resource, which provides experimental data about the interactions between small molecules, including approved drugs and clinical candidates, and specific biological targets reported in the primary medicinal chemistry literature . To facilitate the manipulation of such structureactivity relationship data, the integration of chemical information tools is required. These tools could then be a part of larger data mining protocols. Currently, a limited number of open source cheminformatics packages are available, while, more importantly, few of them incorporate chemical searching functionality using relational database architectures (i.e. a chemistry cartridge). RDKit offers such functionality within a PostgreSQL environment. Based on the easy integration of these open tools and data, a Virtual Machine was configured, and is ready to be used by both expert users who can write and execute custom SQL queries, and new users who can take advantage of a self-contained and user-friendly interface. 
