Gene expression NetWeAvers: an R package for integrative biological network analysis with mass spectrometry data The discovery of functionally related groups in a set of significantly abundant proteins from a mass spectrometry experiment is an important step in a proteomics analysis pipeline. Here we describe NetWeAvers (Network Weighted Averages) for analyzing groups of regulated proteins in a network context, e.g. as defined by clusters of proteinprotein interactions. NetWeAvers is an R package that provides a novel method for analyzing proteomics data integrated with biological networks. The method includes an algorithm for finding dense clusters of proteins and a permutation algorithm to calculate cluster P-values. Optional steps include summarizing quantified pep-tide values to single protein values and testing for differential expression , such that the data input can simply be a list of identified and quantified peaks.The statistical analysis of proteinprotein interaction networks (PPINs) in conjunction with mass spectrometry (MS) data is an effective way to find functional groups of identified proteins in large networks. Several methods for network analysis are already implemented in R, but none are specific to label-free or labeled MS experiments. The package ppiStats provides tools for the analysis of PPINs, specifically for bait-prey technologies . DEGraph performs gene network differential exstatistical significance for each protein. The resulting P-values for individual proteins can be used in the network analysis step, which scores highly connected subgraphs, i.e. dense clusters, with these P-values. Because the need to specify many parameters can greatly impact the results, we chose a highly data-driven cluster-finding algorithm that requires only one parameter. Our protein and cluster scoring each require only one additional parameter.We applied the R package to MS data from a phosphorylation study of human embryonic stem cells (, see Supplementary File S1 for the experimental design). The R package vignette provided as Supplementary File S2 presents the code for summarizing the data, performing hypothesis testing and running the network analysis using the Reactome human PPIN, version 43 . NetWeAvers identified clusters of proteins with roles in processes known to be involved in stem cell differentiation. See Supplementary File 1 for these results, results from NetWeAvers applied to a null dataset and an example using data that were summarized and tested in another R package. 
