Genome analysis Network-guided sparse regression modeling for detection of gene-by-gene interactions Motivation: Genetic variants identified by genome-wide association studies to date explain only a small fraction of total heritability. Gene-by-gene interaction is one important potential source of unexplained total heritability. We propose a novel approach to detect such interactions that uses penalized regression and sparse estimation principles, and incorporates outside biological knowledge through a network-based penalty. Results: We tested our new method on simulated and real data. Simulation showed that with reasonable outside biological knowledge, our method performs noticeably better than stage-wise strategies (i.e. selecting main effects first, and interactions second, from those main effects selected) in finding true interactions, especially when the marginal strength of main effects is weak. We applied our method to Framingham Heart Study data on total plasma immunoglobulin E (IgE) concentrations and found a number of interactions among different classes of human leukocyte antigen genes that may interact to influence the risk of developing IgE dysregulation and allergy. Availability: The proposed method is implemented in R and available atUnlike Mendelian diseases, in which disease phenotypes are largely driven by mutation in a single gene locus, complex disease and traits are associated with a number of factors, both genetic and environmental, as well as lifestyle. In addition, while most Mendelian diseases are rare, many complex diseases are frightfully common, from asthma to heart disease, hypertension to Alzheimers and Parkinsons to various forms of cancer. Arguably motivated by classical successes with Mendelian diseases and traits, the study of complex diseases and traits in the modern genomics era has focused largely on the identification of individually important genes. Genome-wide association studies (GWAS), the current state of the art, have been central to the discovery of many genes in various diseases (e.g.). However, unfortunately, the vast majority of genetic variants associated with complex traits identified to date explain only a small amount of the overall variance of the trait in the underlying population . As a result, most GWAS findings thus far have had little clinical impact. Currently, most GWAS are carried out one single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) at a time. Typically, for each SNP, a model is specified, relating disease status or disease trait to the SNP plus other potentially relevant covariates. The statistical significance of each SNP is quantified through the P-value of an appropriate test. Finally, a multiple-testing correction is applied to correct the collection of P-values across SNPs. The end result is a list of SNPs declared to be significantly associated with the status or trait of interest, which in turn can be mapped to their closest genes, although some associations have been found in gene deserts . The single-SNP approach has the important attribute that it is (relatively) computationally efficient. However, it can be severely under-powered because of the small effect size of most genetic variants identified to date . Additionally, this approach does not adjust for correlation among SNPs, nor does it extend in a natural manner to search for interactions between markers. In contrast, multiple regression (i.e. where multiple SNPs are modeled simultaneously) is a natural alternative. However, naive implementation (i.e. incorporating all SNPs of interest) is both infeasible and undesirable. This is due to various reasons, including the sheer number of SNPs typically available (e.g. hundreds of thousands to millions), the comparatively small number of SNPs likely to be associated and small n, large p problems. Recently, however, computationally efficient multiple regression strategies for GWAS have begun to emerge that use various methods of high-dimensional variable selection (e.g.). Compared with traditional single-SNP methods, penalized regression methods have been found to yield fewer correlated SNPs and to be capable of producing substantially more power while having a lower false-discovery To whom correspondence should be addressed.For our analysis on 17 025 SNPs, we chose to look for 10 main effects, although we allowed the algorithm to terminate after selecting 10 AE 1 main effects, resulting in 9 main effects selected in the current analysis. The parameter c was set to 0.1, which, based on an average estimated SNP variance of 0.27 for these data, corresponds to r 2:7. Nine interactions were found in our approach, yielding a model with 15 9 6 variables. To calibrate our results with those from the stage-wise procedure of, as implemented in Mendel, the latter was run to select 9 variables in the first stage (i.e. fitting only main effects), and then 15 variables in the second stage (i.e. fitting both main effects and interactions, selected from among the 9 SNPs resulting from the first stage). This process produced a final model with nine main effects and six interactions. In terms of computing time, our analysis ran in $5 min on our cluster Linga, equipped with two Intel Xeon CPUs E5345 @ 2.33 GHz, withThe results from our proposed method and from the stagewise procedure are shown in the left and right, respectively, of. The estimates of effect size and the ranks are from the linear mixed-effect model for the final model after variable selection procedure, for both methods. Genes previously found in a GWAS of these FHS data are indicated with an asterisk in the table. In our approach, four of the six interaction pairs involved human leukocyte antigen (HLA) genes, which encode antigen-presenting cell-surface proteins that are key regulators of the immune response. The other two interactions identified were among genes both previously associated with log IgE concentrations . In contrast, Mendel did not detect any interactions among genes in the HLA regions or among pairs of previously associated genes. From a biological perspective, a number of the interactions discovered by our method are of non-trivial potential interest. The major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I antigens HLA-A,-B and-C are involved with cell-mediated immunity targeting cells expressing proteins produced intracellularly, for example, by viruses, while the MHC class II antigens HLADP,-DQ and-DR play key roles with humoral immunity, including the production of IgE antibodies directed against environmental allergens . HLA-G is a nonclassical MHC class I antigen that may have immunomodulatory effects through actions on natural killer cells, T lymphocytes and antigen-presenting cells . Genetic variants in these different classes of HLA geneseach class influencing a different but interconnected aspect of immune functioncould well interact to influence the risk of developing IgE dysregulation and allergy. The observed interaction between SNPs in the alpha chain of the high affinity receptor for IgE (FCER1A) and interleukin (IL)-13 genes may reflect a number of mechanisms. For example, a genetic variant causing increased expression of FcRI on mast cells would lead to increased antigen-induced activation of these cells, which would consequently produce more IL-13 , leading to more class-switch recombination and IgE production. Genetic variation of FcRI on classical antigen-presenting cells may also promote Th2 cell activation with consequent IL-13 release. Thus, SNPs in these two genes in the same pathway leading to increased IgE production could have synergistic effects. Overall, identification of these interactions may help identify the children at highest risk for developing allergy, possibly helping focus interventions to prevent allergy, and may provide new insights into the genetic basis and mechanisms of allergy.There are many potential sources of missing hereditability. G G interactions is one such source. In turn, there are many types of genetic interactions, including multiplicative and non-multiplicative (. In this article, we focus on investigating multiplicative interactions in the form of a product between two variables. Our proposed methodology provides a promising new approach to tapping this source, by exploiting the wealth of biological knowledge accumulated in various pathway databases. The simulations reported here suggest that our approach performs better in finding true interactions with a reasonable prior biological knowledge incorporated, compared with the stagewise regression method that first fits a main-effect model and then searches for interactions among selected main effects. Furthermore, the real-data results are promising in suggesting that better performance likely may be realized in real data as well. Future work to be done on this topic includes extending the computational algorithm to account for linkage disequilibrium among SNPs, and producing a software implementation that uses standard formatted files such as genotype files from the PLINK software package. 
