Structural bioinformatics NMRe: a web server for NMR protein structure refinement with high-quality structure validation scores Protein structure refinement is a necessary step for the study of protein function. In particular , some nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) structures are of lower quality than X-ray crystallographic structures. Here, we present NMRe, a web-based server for NMR structure refinement. The previously developed knowledge-based energy function STAP (Statistical Torsion Angle Potential) was used for NMRe refinement. With STAP, NMRe provides two refinement protocols using two types of distance restraints. If a user provides NOE (Nuclear Overhauser Effect) data, the refinement is performed with the NOE distance restraints as a conventional NMR structure refinement. Additionally, NMRe generates NOE-like distance restraints based on the inter-hydrogen distances derived from the input structure. The efficiency of NMRe refinement was validated on 20 NMR structures. Most of the quality assessment scores of the refined NMR structures were better than those of the original structures. The refinement results are provided as a three-dimensional structure view, a secondary structure scheme, and numerical and graphical structure validation scores. Availability and implementation: NMRe is available at http://psb.kobic.re.kr/nmre/The determination of three-dimensional (3D) protein structures is an important challenge in structural biology because structure is closely related to function. NMR (Nuclear Magnetic Resonance) spectroscopy is one method of protein structure determination, and it also provides information about the dynamics of proteins. However, protein structures determined by NMR spectroscopy are of lower quality than X-ray structures. Thus, refinement is a necessary step in NMR structure study. Three NMR structure refinement databases have been constructed: DRESS (a Database of REfined Solution NMR Structures;), RECOORD (REcalculated COORdinates Database;) and STAP (Statistical Torsion Angle Potential;). NMR structure refinement using the NOE (Nuclear Overhauser Effect) distance data obtained by NMR is performed in many refinement studies . However, NOE distance data exist in various formats, such as CYANA, CNS and XPLOR. Therefore, NOE data manipulation is difficult for general researchers. Another problem in improving NMR structures is the ambiguity and sparseness of NOE data . The NMRe web server provides simple and fast NMR structure refinement with NOE-like distance data using theNMRe refinement was tested on 20 structures obtained from PDB that have both NMR and X-ray structures (Supplementary). The X-ray structures were used as a reference for measuring backbone similarity. The structure quality was measured using backbone similarity, NOE violation and structure validation scores (Supplementary Tables S2 and S3 and Supplementary). In the NMRe_dist, the TM-score was increased from 0.79 to 0.80, and three energy scores (DOPE, nDOPE and dDFIRE) were stabilized. The clash score was also improved from 53.81 to 0.40. The Ramachandran score and several parameters of the WHAT_CHECK Z-score were significantly improved in the NMRe_noe. In particular, the PROCHECK Ramachandran score was improved from 80.98 to 95.36. In Supplementary Table S3, comprehensive NOE restraint violations were reported. The number of violated NOE, Root Mean Square Deviation (RMSD) and Maximum NOE violation were improved in NMRe_noe. However, NMRe_dist has a slightly increased NOE restraints violation in comparison with original. Because the experimental measurement of NOE distance may have a distance error of 0.51.0 A , these results are not regarded as a serious defect. Additionally, we demonstrated that dihedral angle restraints do not contribute much in this protocol (Supplementary). One of example target (2L4S) and comparison of the performance between the NMRe and other known refinement protocols are described in Supplementary Information. 
