Sequence analysis Novel sequence-based method for identifying transcription factor binding sites in prokaryotic genomes Motivation: Computational techniques for microbial genomic sequence analysis are becoming increasingly important. With next-generation sequencing technology and the human microbiome project underway, current sequencing capacity is significantly greater than the speed at which organisms of interest can be studied experimentally. Most related computational work has been focused on sequence assembly, gene annotation and metabolic network reconstruction. We have developed a method that will primarily use available sequence data in order to determine prokaryotic transcription factor (TF) binding specificities. Results: Specificity determining residues (critical residues) were identified from crystal structures of DNAprotein complexes and TFs with the same critical residues were grouped into specificity classes. The putative binding regions for each class were defined as the set of promoters for each TF itself (autoregulatory) and the immediately upstream and downstream operons. MEME was used to find putative motifs within each separate class. Tests on the LacI and TetR TF families, using RegulonDB annotated sites, showed the sensitivity of prediction 86 and 80, respectively.There are more bacterial species than from any other kingdom, but only a few have been studied in much detail. Their relatively small genomes make them readily amenable to sequencing and they now constitute the most abundant genome sequences in the public databases. Projects such as the Human Microbiome Project and other metagenomic sequencing projects promise to significantly increase the amount of genomic sequence from bacterial species. For most of these species, the genome sequence is the only available information so computational approaches are essential to learning more about their characteristics and capabilities. Most current computational analyses focus on sequence assembly , the phylogenetic distributions of species , functional To whom correspondence should be addressed. classification of gene and metabolic network reconstruction . Many of these analyses are accomplished through the identification of homologous proteins with known function and the inference of functional conservation in the newly sequenced species. As of yet, there has been little computational work focused on transcriptional regulation in these prokaryotic systems. In this article, we present a novel sequence-based method to infer the specificities of prokaryotic transcription factors (TFs) through the comparisons of their DNAbinding domains and applying a motif-finding algorithm to likely binding regions. Most prokaryotic TFs contain a helix-turn-helix (HTH) fold, where the second helix, also known as the recognition helix, primarily contacts DNA . Using crystal structures of proteinDNA complexes, we can determine a set of residues that is important for defining the specificity of the protein, the critical residues. Commonly, these HTH TFs bind as homodimers with palindromic DNA specificities. Previous studies have utilized those features to identify regulatory motifs in related bacterial species but in those cases the TF that binds the motif was not identified except in cases where the motif corresponded to one for a known TF . In general, when the binding motif for a specific TF is known, and orthologous TFs are identified in other species, one can transfer the knowledge about the motif and predict genes that are regulated by the TF in the new species . Making connections between novel motifs and the TFs that bind them can also be accomplished by taking into account additional information . In that study, the most useful information for identifying the TF that bound to a specific motif was the proximity of the TF, within the genome, to the locations of the predicted binding sites. In a similar approach, motifs for orthologous TF were predicted based on the assumption of autoregulation . In an earlier study of the Escherichia coli transcriptome, 55 of the TFs analyzed were estimated to be autoregulated (Martnez-Antonio and). Our analysis using RegulonDB 6.7 indicates that this value increases to 78 if one also includes the promoters of neighboring operons. Motif finders typically depend on having at least one of two types of data. In a phylogenetic footprinting approach one has orthologous genes from a set of species and attempts to find the conserved binding site motifs that control their expression . Using such data one can often findBetween releases 176 and 177, Genbank contained 1056 complete bacterial genomes and 634 WGS datasets as well as 2011 plasmid and 543 phage genomes. In this study, we have focused on the LacI (PF00356) and TetR (PF00440) Pfam HTH subfamilies .The values shown are the number of sequences (with the exception of the first values that are the number of domains) and within the parentheses are the number of specificity clusters. Briefly, USPs are promoter sets that have been filtered to remove redundancy (see Section 2 for more detail). Hamming Distance (HD) is a measure of similarity, the number of substitutions required to change one string into another.These two subfamilies comprise roughly 1/10 of the HTH domains in the Pfam clan CL0123. From that set of DNA sequences, for LacI there are 5989 domains. When filtered to remove gaps in restricted positions, multiple domains and missing promoter sequences, there are 5258 TFs remaining, and we defined the critical residues based on three LacI family proteins that have structures bound to DNA: LacI (PDB codes 1efa, 1jwl, 2pe5); CcpA (PDB codes 1rzr, 1zvv); and PurR (PDB codes 1bdh,1 bdi, 1jfs, 1jft, 1jh9, 1pnr, 1qp0, 1qp4, 1qp7, 1qpz, 1qqa, 1qqb, 1vpw, 1wet, 1zay, 2pua, 2pub, 2puc, 2pud, 2pue, 2puf, 2pug). Based on those structures, we determine that there are 10 critical residues (positions 2,3,12,13,14,17,18,24,25,26) in the respective Pfam HMM domain (PF00356). Using those 10 positions to define the specificity classes, there are a total of 1827 classes. There are 23 119 TetR domains which, after the same data filtering as above, lead to 21 883 TFs. In TetR, we defined the critical residues based on three proteins that have structures bound to DNA in the PDB: TetR (PDB code 1qpi); QacR (PDB code 1jt0); CGL2612 (PDB code 2yvh). Based on those structures, we determine that there are seven critical residues from the respective Pfam HMM domain (PF00440). Using those seven positions to define specificity classes, there are a total of 6207 classes. The distribution of the sequences into these specificity clusters is shown in. The identity of the residues at the critical residue positions defines a sequence tag. For example, the cluster TetR-SPKGSYH refers to the set of all proteins that are classified as belonging to the TetR family of HTH proteins and have residues S, P, K, G, S, Y, H in, respectively. For motif finding, the promoter sequences with potential binding sites were inferred using the computationally derived operons, taking the promoter of the operon containing the TF, and the upstream and downstream operon promoters as well. These three promoters were concatenated into a super-promoter, which likely contained at least one binding site for the TF. There are a large number of similar genomes that have been sequenced; many times these are simply different strains of model prokaryotic organisms. This introduces the issue of similar sequence due to a similar lineage which could be resolved using a phylogenetic tree. However, there is also the potential issue of horizontal gene transfer as well. In order to resolve the potential promoter redundancy issue, if the promoters were too similar, they were reduced to one exemplar sequence.The matches in RegulonDB are coded as follows: Y means a match to any site, N means no matches and means no RegulonDB site. The autoreg column is a + if there is a match to the super-promoter and-if there is no match.Using primarily genomic sequence data augmented with structural priors, we are able to determine putative motifs for a number of bacterial TFs in two families. The method described is capable of working not only with fully sequenced genomes, but also with sufficiently long contigs, allowing for the use of assembled metagenomic reads. Using the MEME program, putative motifs were determined for 31 (LacI) and 214 (TetR) classes of TFs representing 1/3 of the sequences of each of these TF families. For validation, classes that had an excluded E.coli USPs were selected, 8 (LacI) and 10 (TetR). Of these selected classes, 7 (LacI) and 5 (TetR) had known regulatory sites in RegulonDB. The majority of these motifs, 6/7 for LacI and 4/5 for TetR, were consistent with the known regulatory sites defined based on RegulonDB, validating this approach. Even some of the motifs that did not match to known sites with scores exceeding our stringent threshold still had fairly high scores and are likely to be very similar to the true motifs for those classes. While this approach has proven to be useful, there are several modifications to the method we describe in this article that should offer further improvements in our ability to determine binding motifs for bacterial TFs. The current protocol assumes a fixed-width gap between the half-sites of the motif. However, there is no guarantee that proteins with similar critical residues must have similar gaps in the spacer region between the half-sites, as the regions of the protein that determine these variable gaps are generally outside of the DNA binding domain . Even within the test set, we can see evidence of multiple widths in TetR-SPKGSYH. In the first and third motif, there is a TAGACC half site, separated by a 4 or 0 base spacer from the complementary GGTCTA. For TetR-NPKGSYH, these spacers are 
