Sequence analysis Nsite, NsiteH and NsiteM computer tools for studying transcription regulatory elements Gene transcription is mostly conducted through interactions of various transcription factors and their binding sites on DNA (regulatory elements, REs). Today, we are still far from understanding the real regulatory content of promoter regions. Computer methods for identification of REs remain a widely used tool for studying and understanding transcriptional regulation mechanisms. The Nsite, NsiteH and NsiteM programs perform searches for statistically significant (non-random) motifs of known human, animal and plant one-box and composite REs in a single genomic sequence, in a pair of aligned homologous sequences and in a set of functionally related sequences, respectively. Availability and implementation: Pre-compiled executables built under commonly used operating systems are available for download by visitingTranscription regulatory elements (REs) bound by transcription factors (TFs) are main players in gene expression (Gr nberg and Hahn, 2013). Although a large set of experimentally identified REs/TFs has been collected in several databases , the real RE content of promoters of most genes remains unidentified.Established computational RE identification algorithms are predominantly based on one of two approaches: (i) the search for motifs of known REs or (ii) the comparative analysis of homologous sequences aimed to discover new REs . The first type of methods uses regulatory site and/or IUPAC consensus sequences or position-weight matrices. One of challenges in RE detection is to estimate the statistical significance of located motifs to distinguish them from random matches. In addition, in some cases, TFs bind a composite RE (a pair of DNA motifs with a spacer sequence of variable length between them) rather than a single short DNA region. Here, we present Nsite, NsiteH and NsiteM, a set of programs to predict both single and composite REs in query sequences and estimate their statistical significance.Previously, we proposed a probabilistic model that computes the probability of observing given sequence motifs or consensuses in random nucleotide sequences of the same length and nucleotide frequencies as a query sequence. The model also estimates the expected number of such motifs in random sequences. In particular, the model assumes that because REs are small that numbers rather than frequencies of nucleotides should be used to describe RE consensus sequences (; see also Supplementary Material S4). These statistical estimations provide the opportunity to find non-random similarities (unlikely to have occurred by chance) between a set of functional motifs and regions of an analyzed sequence. By applying this approach, we developed the Nsite, NsiteH and NsiteM computer V C The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press. 
