NucleusJ: an ImageJ plugin for quantifying 3D images of interphase nuclei NucleusJ is a simple and user-friendly ImageJ plugin dedicated to the characterization of nuclear morphology and chromatin organization in 3D. Starting from image stacks, the nuclear boundary is delimited by combining the Otsu segmentation method with optimization of nuclear sphericity. Chromatin domains are segmented by partitioning the nucleus using a 3D watershed algorithm and by thresholding a contrast measure over the resulting regions. As output, NucleusJ quantifies 15 parameters including shape and size of nuclei as well as intra-nuclear objects and their position within the nucleus. A step-by-step documentation is available for self-training, together with data sets of nuclei with different nuclear organization. Availability and implementation: Dataset of nuclei is available at https://www.gred-clermont.fr/ media/WorkDirectory.zip. NucleusJ is available at http://imagejdocu.tudor.lu/The nucleus is a compartmentalized organelle containing distinct chromosomal domains and a variety of nuclear bodies. Organization and positioning of chromatin domains within the nuclear space, such as clusters of heterochromatin termed chromocentres , impact gene expression . To link nuclear structure and function, imaging tools that quantify nuclear morphology, positioning and organization of chromatin domains in three dimensions (3D) are needed. Although proprietary softwares or open source programs such as NEMO and TANGO are available , they either require financial investment or minimal knowledge of image processing algorithms. Our NucleusJ plugin assembles a complete set of methods in a coherent strategy, quantifies 15 different nuclear and chromatin parameters and does not require expertise in image analysis.Following segmentation, a morphometric analysis is applied to measure nuclear volume and 3D shape descriptors (flatness, elongation and sphericity). NucleusJ also computes chromatin organization parameters such as number, total volume and intensity of chromocentres relative to the entire nucleus as well as individual chromocentre parameters including volume and distance to the nuclear periphery. Overall, the nucleus is characterized by 15 quantitative parameters (and Supplementary), which are automatically saved as output files for further statistical analysis. NucleusJ was validated using an Arabidopsis mutant line lacking CROWDED NUCLEI (CRWN) proteins, which are putative components of the plant nucleoskeleton . Analysis of a small set of 38 (wild type) and 39 (crwn1 crwn2 mutant) nuclei revealed reduced nuclear volume, increased sphericity and fewer chromocentres of increased size in the mutant compared with WT, in perfect agreement with). The analysis of the 77 nuclei took about 1 h. The time-limiting step is the manual thresholding of contrast images for chromocentre segmentation, since it involves visual crosschecking with raw images . The statistical analysis of the data validates our method and opens avenues to phenotype nuclei in other Arabidopsis mutants, as well as in different cell types of other organisms.Computational image analysis provides precise, objective and reproducible quantitative data from images. Our plugin generates, within a few steps, 3D quantitative measurements from single images or large data sets, without requiring expertise in image analysis. Nuclear domains visible with DNA dyes, such as chromocentres, are not specific to plants. NucleusJ will, therefore, be useful for a large community of users interested in quantifying size and shape of nuclei, nuclear objects or chromatin domains as well as positioning of the latter in nuclear space. In the future, we expect to improve our segmentation methods, to extend NucleusJ to quantify fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) and immunochemistry signals and to define a new method to automatically segment chromocentres. 
