Ontology for medicinal materials based on traditional Korean medicine We are constructing an ontology for traditional Korean medicine, and we started with medicinal materials to express the relationships between patients symptoms, diseases and treatments. Biological materials and mineral resources have been used traditionally for patient treatments. The ontology includes various data related to these materials, such as their scientific names, parts of materials used, effectiveness and related oriental organ of the human body.Although the knowledge systems of traditional medicine and modern medical science differ, comparative studies and applied approaches are valuable. Symptoms are practically identical from a patients point of view, apart from cultural and linguistic differences. Patients symptoms and the prescribed treatments are important fields with which to link modern medical science to traditional medicine. For these purposes, we are constructing an ontology of traditional Korean medicine (TKM) for symptoms, diseases and treatments, and we are starting out by focusing on the knowledge of medicinal materials in traditional treatments. For traditional Chinese medicine (TCM), the following related works have been done.stored a Unified TCM Language System (UTCMLS) in relational databases, but it is not shared on the Web. To overcome the problem of semantic heterogeneity and to encode the domain knowledge in a reusable format, an integrated approach to developing and applying the largescale domain ontology was proposed ; however, this ontology is not available to the public. The Chinese herbal database (www.tcmbasics.com/materiamedica .htm) is available in plain text, but only 116 herbs are currentlyincluded; the botanical names used in China are listed in this database. We included more medicinal materials in China and Korea. This resource is available to the public and viewable in the Web Ontology Language. It will be available in a public ontology repository as soon as it is ready. 
