OVA: integrating molecular and physical phenotype data from multiple biomedical domain ontologies with variant filtering for enhanced variant prioritization Motivation: Exome sequencing has become a de facto standard method for Mendelian disease gene discovery in recent years, yet identifying disease-causing mutations among thousands of candidate variants remains a non-trivial task. Results: Here we describe a new variant prioritization tool, OVA (ontology variant analysis), in which user-provided phenotypic information is exploited to infer deeper biological context. OVA combines a knowledge-based approach with a variant-filtering framework. It reduces the number of candidate variants by considering genotype and predicted effect on protein sequence, and scores the remainder on biological relevance to the query phenotype. We take advantage of several ontologies in order to bridge knowledge across multiple biomedical domains and facilitate computational analysis of annotations pertaining to genes, diseases, phenotypes , tissues and pathways. In this way, OVA combines information regarding molecular and physical phenotypes and integrates both human and model organism data to effectively prioritize variants. By assessing performance on both known and novel disease mutations, we show that OVA performs biologically meaningful candidate variant prioritization and can be more accurate than another recently published candidate variant prioritization tool. Availability and implementation: OVA is freely accessible atThe application of next-generation sequencing for disease gene discovery or clinical diagnostics can generate large volumes of data, often resulting in identification of thousands of candidate disease genes or variants. A healthy individual genome can harbor more than a hundred genuine loss-of-function mutations , making the identification of mutations responsible for a given phenotype a non-trivial task. As systematic experimental verification of each variant is infeasible, several computational prioritization methods have emerged in recent years that attempt to tackle this problem.We use Datasets 1 and 2 to assess OVA performance for simulated disease cases both with and without a previous known molecular basis. For each disease gene tested in Datasets 1 and 2, we remove any known disease or human phenotype associations in our database, in order to simulate cases of novel gene discovery. Human phenotype-related features that directly link the test gene to disease are also replaced with unknown values in the instance classification step. We rank each test gene with respect to disease together with 200 randomly selected genes from the pool of all human genes which have at least minimal Gene Ontology annotations in order to avoid any bias, as known disease genes are rarely entirely unannotated. We assess three methods for obtaining the final scores, as discussed in the Methods sectionaverage, a weighted average approach and a machine learning approach. Receiver operator characteristic (ROC) curves and corresponding area under the curve (AUC) values were calculated using R package ROCR .shows the ROC curves obtained using Dataset 1, whileshows the ROC curves obtained using Dataset 2. There is a notable difference in performance between the three methods that is consistent across the datasets used. Our model, which was trained using 32 features, is able to prioritize candidate disease genes with greater accuracy than the average or a weighted average approaches using the same scores. As expected, there is a notable difference in performance between Datasets 1 and 2. Performance of OVA is greatly enhanced (AUC up to 0.9636) where knowledge about previously identified molecular causes of the disease is available. However, extending the search to diseases which cause similar phenotypes allows the prioritization of cases where little is known about the molecular causes of a disease that is still robust (AUC up to 0.8985). The key parameter in OVA is the phenotype filter. In order to ascertain how sensitive our algorithm is to various amounts of input noise, we have used Dataset 1 to simulate cases where the phenotype is inaccurately or inadequately described. Introducing additional irrelevant query phenotypes had less of an impact on the accuracy of the results than excluding relevant terms (Supplementaryand B); however, our method tolerates minor levels of noise. OVA incorporates an extensive variant filtering step available for VCF files, including support for multi-sample VCF files with multiple affected/unaffected patients that can be often available to researchers studying rare genetic diseases. As such, we compared variant prioritization capabilities of OVA with another recently reported variant prioritization tool, ExomeWalker which uses a current state-of-the-art algorithm for network-based gene prioritization, coupled with a variant scoring approach. We use Dataset 3 to see how these two tools compare. In order to simulate novel gene discovery, we supply all known genes for the disease (except the test gene) as seeds to ExomeWalker; for OVA, any associations between test gene and disease are removed as previously described. For both tools, we provide the inheritance mode of the disease for each test instance and use default parameters.shows the disease gene rank distributions obtained by both tools. Out of 150 VCF files, in 20 of the cases OVA ranked the true disease gene first, with ExomeWalker performing similarly at 16. A total of 64 of instances were ranked in the top 10 by OVA, compared with 51 by ExomeWalker. Although ExomeWalker scored 58 of all cases very accurately and the other 42 poorly, only 10 test cases were ranked outside the top 100 by OVA. Additionally, as OVA can be used to prioritize genes as well as variants, we have opted to compare our approach with another gene prioritization tool, G2D . G2D can prioritize candidates using data from GO annotations, sequence similarity, MeSH terms and STRING protein-protein interactions. We have chosen this tool for comparison due to parallels in data sources used by OVA; use of seed gene input which enables a cross-validation based testing approach that we applied to OVA and ExomeWalker; and finally, a straight forward web application that facilitates automation for large testing data sets. Using Dataset 1, we provided as input to G2D a 100 MB genomic region containing a test gene and other known genes associated with the disease asROC curves showing the performance of OVA while using Dataset 1 (A) and Dataset 2 (B). Each dataset was prioritized using three methodsthe average (green), the weighted average (red) and a classifier (blue) built using a supervised learning approachIntegrating molecular and physical phenotype dataseeds, and similarly prioritized all genes within the same region with OVA. Although OVA significantly outperformed G2D (AUC 0.9593 versus 0.8524, Supplementary), some of the differences in accuracy could be accounted for by somewhat outdated data used by G2D (as of this writing, last updated in 2010). Finally, in order to verify that our results are consistent with real cases of novel disease gene discovery, we use our model to prioritize 20 recently published novel disease gene mutations (Dataset 4). We use a version of our database frozen before publication dates to assess performance.summarizes the results. The ranking is overall somewhat poorer than that observed using our other datasets, with 14 out of 20 genes ranked in the top 25.The development of open biomedical ontologies has exploded in the last decade and alongside it the coverage and accuracy of annotations. Here we take advantage of this rich resource to bring together ontologies from across multiple domains to produce OVA, a knowledge-based gene and variant prioritization tool. OVA utilizes human and model organism phenotypes, functional annotations, curated pathways, cellular localizations and anatomical terms to find genes most relevant to a query phenotype.), utilizing model organism phenotype data in a generalized gene prioritization approach is becoming more viable as coverage increases. Gene ontology annotations have proved to be one of the most frequently utilized sources of gene functional knowledge in computational biology, with numerous applications taking advantage of this structured and highly curated resource. GO has also been heavily utilized as a data source for various candidate disease gene prioritization applications. However, while candidate prioritization methods using Gene ontology semantic similarity measures have generally been demonstrated to be effective, there are a number of drawbacks that this type of methodology suffers from that can detract from usability, accuracy and utility.The majority of tools catalogued at Gene Prioritization Portal require the user to supply seed genesgenes already known to be associated with the diseaseand score candidates based on similarity to these. This is a major limitation of this approach, as in the case of rare or novel phenotypes, any prioritization based on similarity to known disease genes is impossible. Furthermore, the quality of available annotations of the supplied genes largely determines the success of this type of approach, while also allowing for little functional heterogeneity among disease genes. Here, we supplement this approach by building links across multiple ontologies. This allows enhancing the functional profile against which all candidate genes are scored by reasoning directly from a disease phenotype, as well as known genes. Consequently, this approach eliminates the requirement for the user to supply known seed genes and reduces the reliance on quality seed gene annotations. The integration of data from across multiple ontologies can supplement knowledge where it may be incomplete or inadequate in a particular domain. Although most human genes now have GO annotations available, shallow annotationsi.e. low IC termsare still prevalent. Similarly, there are a number of terms that while they may not be considered uninformative, are not meaningful for candidate gene prioritization without further context. Two genes annotated with the term regulation of transcription, DNA-templated (GO:0006355) would be considered highly functionally similar, and yet could participate in regulation of entirely different pathways. Accordingly, pathway ontology annotations can serve to fill in this knowledge gap, helping to decide whether a gene is truly relevant to the query phenotype and improving prioritization accuracy by removing noise. Here, we simulate novel gene discovery in well and poorly characterized diseases and show that our method is capable of meaningful candidate gene prioritization even when direct functional knowledge about the disease is lacking . By inferring new gene-disease associations through phenotype semantic similarity search and cross-ontology bridges, OVA attempts to deduce missing annotations, enabling gene prioritization for new and rare human diseases and supplementing the functional profile of better characterized phenotypes. We show that our model distinguishes relevant genes accurately and, coupled with our variant filtering approach, performs better than another recently published variant prioritization tool . Knowledge-based candidate gene/variant prioritization methods have been known to perform worse than reported when predicting novel disease genes . However, large scale assessment using novel disease genes is not feasible. Cross-validationbased methods of individually removing direct disease-gene associations can serve to simulate novel gene discovery by ensuring that the test gene does not contribute to the query annotation profile. However, there is a degree of knowledge circularity in ontology annotations that is difficult to account for. By prioritizing VCF files containing 20 newly reported mutations in novel disease genes, we show that there is agreement between these results and those obtained from a larger, simulated dataset (and), although the novel variant dataset prioritization was somewhat less accurate. Thus, we maintain that our results on previously described disease genes represent a reasonable approximation of the true accuracy of OVA. Through an interactive and intuitive web interface, OVA allows the user to control many aspects of the prioritization process. OVA employs The Human Phenotype Ontology to facilitate detailedphenotypes queries in addition to previously described diseases, enabling prioritization for novel diseases. OVA can be accessed freely at http://dna2.leeds.ac.uk:8080/OVA/index.jsp through any modern browser with JavaScript support. 
