An exome sequencing pipeline for identifying and genotyping common CNVs associated with disease with application to psoriasis Motivation: Despite the prevalence of copy number variation (CNV) in the human genome, only a handful of confirmed associations have been reported between common CNVs and complex disease. This may be partially attributed to the difficulty in accurately genotyping CNVs in large cohorts using array-based technologies. Exome sequencing is now widely being applied to casecontrol cohorts and presents an exciting opportunity to look for common CNVs associated with disease. Results: We developed ExoCNVTest: an exome sequencing analysis pipeline to identify disease-associated CNVs and to generate absolute copy number genotypes at putatively associated loci. Our method rediscovered the LCE3B_LCE3C CNV association with psoriasis (P-value = 5 10e6) while controlling inflation of test statistics (1). ExoCNVTest-derived absolute CNV genotypes were 97.4 concordant with PCR-derived genotypes at this locus.Common copy number variation (CNV) in the human genome has been extensively catalogued using both array comparative hybridization (aCGH) as well as more recently with next-generation whole genome sequencing . Studies have demonstrated that common CNV is prevalent in genic as well as non-genic regions of the genome and accounts for 18 of detected genetic variation in gene expression . While common copy number variants associated with complex disease have been identified , they are vastly fewer than reported single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) associations. In a landmark study, the Wellcome Trust Case Control Consortium identified the majority of common CNV with allele frequency 5 and genotyped this variation in seven To whom correspondence should be addressed. complex disease cohorts and two control cohorts using microarray-based comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH). However, analysis of these data revealed only three previously identified copy number associations . This study also comprehensively identified many sources of bias which continue to plague CNV association studies, including batch effects, systematic differences between DNA extracted from cell lines versus whole blood, homology, particularly to the MHC, as well as difficulty in accurately determining CNV genotypes. The authors of this study concluded that the subset of CNVs that are genotypeable on CGH arraysmostly simple non-recurrent deletionsdo not explain a large proportion of phenotypic variation. However, there remains the possibility of extensive disease association with more complex CNV, as well as common CNV with small to moderate effect sizes. In contrast to most complex disease, the role of common CNV in the pathogenesis of psoriasis has been robustly demonstrated and replicated across multiple populations worldwide . In particular, association between psoriasis and a deletion spanning the late cornified envelope genes LCE3B and LCE3C was originally shown in European populations and was subsequently replicated in a Chinese cohort . This CNV is a simple 32.2-kb deletion, with allele frequency of 60, for which both heterozygote and homozygote deletions are found in the population. The LCE3B_LCE3C deletion has an odds ratio of 1.38 for psoriasis. Exome capture sequencing is now widely being applied to both Mendelian and complex disease cohorts , primarily to find rare associations with disease which have not been identified by extensive GWAS (O), as well as to refine association signals already reported . Exome sequencing uses hybridization technology to first capture the majority of exons, and then subsequently applies massively parallel sequencing to these captured fragments. As the sequencing step is a stochastic process, the number of times a sequence is read should be reflective of its relative copy number in the original sample. However, because of the hybridization step, many of the biases present in array-based studies, such as batch effects and, effects from obtaining DNA from different sources are still present in these data. Nevertheless, the utility ofWe applied ExoCNVTest to exome sequence data collected on 800 controls and 700 psoriasis cases. Association of the uncorrected FPC was highly inflated with inflation factor of 8.5 (and). In this analysis the known association LCE3B_LCE3C was ranked 3750 out of 105 088 regions. Correction for 5 and 20 GPCs progressively reduced inflation of test statistics and also increased the rank of LCE3B_LCE3C. However, correction for 40 GPCs was required to entirely remove inflation of test statistics and reduce 1. In this analysis the LCE3B_LCE3C cluster was ranked 25th, with P-value of 7.2e5. In order to investigate whether our approach was accurately capturing the underlying CNV present in LCE3B_LCE3C, we i371investigated the correlation between the adjusted FPC in these capture regions and gold standard copy number genotypes obtained from PCR in these samples. We observed increasing correlation between the adjusted FPC and the gold-standard PCR genotypes up to 20 GPC, but not beyond . This demonstrates that adjusting for GPCs has two effectsthe first being to reduce spurious signals and the second being to increase the correlation between real and detected signals at genuine associated loci, although the optimal number of GPC correction may be different for these two goals. We also observed substantial GC biases in uncorrected association statistics, with an over-representation of significantly associated signals at 33 and 60 GC content . Correcting for 40 GPCs removed this bias . Finally, we attempted to obtain absolute copy number genotypes at the LCE3B_LCE3C loci. We did this by averaging the persample read depth in 100-bp windows divided by average genome wide read depth and then projecting out the first 40 global PCs.These normalized data were presented to cnvHap, with initial copy number cluster positions at 0, 0.5, 1, 1.5, 2 normalized read depth for 0, 1, 2, 3, 4 copy numbers, respectively. cnvHap updates the positions of these cluster positions within a generalized expectation maximization framework and then reports the per-sample copy number genotypes . The reported CNV genotypes were found to be 97.4 concordant with gold standard CNV genotypes, with a missing rate of 14.7 . These CNV genotypes had stronger association with case-control status (P-value of 5e6) than FPC, demonstrating the value of using these genotypes to refine the association signal.While approaches for finding common SNP association with disease have become routine, finding common CNV associated with complex disease has proven more elusive. Accurately genotyping CNVs in large casecontrol cohorts using data from SNP genotyping arrays remains very challenging, and attempts to associate CNV genotypes defined in this way with disease have often led to highly inflated test statistics, as well as results that are difficult to independently replicate. Array CGH was used to discover the LCE3B_LCE3C association, and studies using array CGH tend to be more robust. However, aCGH studies are still subject to substantial batch effects, and aCGH has not been widely applied to very large multi-centre casecontrol cohorts needed to detect small to modest effect sizes. Now that exome sequencing is being routinely applied to casecontrol cohorts, there is a new opportunity to look for common CNV associations with disease. This article provides the first proof-of-principle that exome sequencing can be used in this way, by developing an algorithm which adequately controls for batch effects, and applying this algorithm to re-discover one of the few confirmed common CNV associations with complex disease. We have also shown that as well as detecting CNV association with disease, it is possible to calculate highly accurate absolute copy number genotypes at associated loci. To do this, we have applied cnvHap to perform joint CNV segmentation and genotyping. cnvHap has been shown to be one of the most sensitive CNV discovery and genotyping algorithms, due to its flexible modelling of intensity data (in this case read-depth data) across an entire population. Application of our method yielded an association P-value between LCE3B_LCE3C_del and psoriasis of 7.2e5 using FPC corrected for 40 GPCs, and 5e6 using estimated absolute CNV genotypes. While these P-values are not as significant as the initial reported P-value of 1.38e8 , this initial study was based on 2831 samples while the data presented here are derived from 1500 samples. A UK replicationCNV genotyping accuracy, missing rates and association with psoriasis status after correction for GPCs. study with 1962 samples obtained an association P-value of 0.03, while a larger German replication study with 2278 samples obtained an association P-value of 3.3e5 . Principal components are widely used to adjust for the inflation of test statistics due to population structure in genome-wide association studies; however, these studies typically only adjust for up to 10 PCs, with a greater number of PCs required for highly structured populations. The fact that 40 PCs were required to correct for readdepth biases likely reflects the fact that the batch size consisted of two samples per capture array. We might speculate that CNV of genes, and more specifically exons, may generate substantial phenotypic variation. Our ability to assess this effect to date has been limited by the technical challenge of array technologies. Exome sequencing, however, as it is measuring precisely this type of variation in the genome, provides an exciting opportunity to finally assess the association between gene copy number and phenotype. 
