Structural bioinformatics PARS: a web server for the prediction of Protein Allosteric and Regulatory Sites The regulation of protein activity is a key aspect of life at the molecular level. Unveiling its details is thus crucial to understanding signalling and metabolic pathways. The most common and powerful mechanism of protein-function regulation is allostery, which has been increasingly calling the attention of medicinal chemists due to its potential for the discovery of novel therapeutics. In this context, PARS is a simple and fast method that queries protein dynamics and structural conservation to identify pockets on a protein structure that may exert a regulatory effect on the binding of a small-molecule ligand. Availability: PARS is freely available as a web server at http://bioinf. uab.cat/pars.Tight regulation of protein function is fundamental to life. Proteins involved in metabolic pathways, signalling cascades and genomic transcription, among other processes within the living cell, are commonly under allosteric regulation, i.e. their activity is modified through the binding of a ligand molecule to the protein in a site different from the active site. In fact, allostery is one of the most powerful protein-function regulation mechanisms, as it allows proteins to sense and immediately respond to changes in their environment . Traditional drug-design approaches focusing on active or primary binding sites can be, therefore, extended by exploiting allosteric sites, as shown by current efforts on GPCRs or farnesyl pyrophosphate synthase . An advantage of targeting allosteric sites therapeutically is a reduced risk of secondary adverse effects. This is because allosteric sites appear to be significantly less conserved than active sites across homolog proteins , enabling the design of allosteric drugs with high specificity for a single protein within a family. This observation has motivated the development of allosteric drugs for the regulation of phosphodiesterase 4D, for which active site inhibitors cause emesis, a dose-limiting side effect . Moreover, a drug-discovery approach based on allosteric sites may result in the development of not only novel drug-like inhibitors but activators as well . Other concepts such as the notion of serendipitous allosteric sites, which have no known ligand in nature but can become functional in the presence of an opportunistic ligand or the idea that almost any protein may be regulated allosterically , contribute to the current interest in the pharmacological exploitation of allosteric sites. In this context, it is expected that a deeper understanding of the properties of allosteric sites and their identification would help streamlining the design and discovery of novel therapeutic drugs . Despite growing efforts, the atomic-level details that explain the functional relationship between distant sites in the same protein molecule have not been elucidated for most of the known cases of allostery . This has motivated a growth in the number of computational studies on protein allosteric sites, including the recent publication of three web servers: SPACER and MCPath , which study the allosteric communication across residues in a protein structure, and Allosite , which predicts allosteric sites on protein structures using a machine-learning approach. Here, we present PARS, which queries protein flexibility and structural conservation to predict the location of allosteric sites. The implementation emphasizes ease-of-use and speed, whereas maintaining high accuracy as benchmarked against a large set of known allosteric proteins. Even though our method (as the servers mentioned earlier in the text) requires a protein structure to work, we have added an initial homology modelling step that allows the user to run predictions starting from protein sequence in cases where a known structure is not available. 
