PASPA: a web server for mRNA poly(A) site predictions in plants and algae Motivation: Polyadenylation is an essential process during eukaryotic gene expression. Prediction of poly(A) sites helps to define the 3 0 end of genes, which is important for gene annotation and elucidating gene regulation mechanisms. However, due to limited knowledge of poly(A) signals, it is still challenging to predict poly(A) sites in plants and algae. PASPA is a web server for poly(A) site prediction in plants and algae, which integrates many in-house tools as add-ons to facilitate poly(A) site prediction, visualization and mining. This server can predict poly(A) sites for ten species , including seven previously poly(A) signal non-characterized species, with sensitivity and spe-cificity in a range between 0.80 and 0.95. Availability and implementation: http://bmi.Polyadenylation is one of the essential processes and a point of regulation for eukaryotic gene expression. This process involves the cleavage at the 3 0 end of pre-messenger RNA (pre-mRNA) and the addition of a poly(A) tail. A poly(A) site marks the end of a gene, the recognition of which is important to fully understand the functions of genes and to accurately annotate the genomes. Given the connection between polyadenylation and transcription termination, correct identification of poly(A) sites would also predict where transcription termination may occur. Moreover, alternative polyadenylation, the use of different poly(A) sites of a gene, has been recognized as an important gene expression regulator in eukaryotes. A number of computational tools based on support vector machine or discriminant analysis have been developed to predict poly(A) sites or poly(A) signals in human, including Erpin , POLYAR , Dragon PolyA Spotter , etc. Unlike human or animals where the dominant signal AAUAAA is found in 50 of poly(A) sites , no highly conserved poly(A) signal can be found in plants or algae , there are subsequently fewer prediction models available. Our group developed a poly(A) site prediction tool called Poly(A) Site Sleuth (PASS) based on a generalized hidden Markov model (GHMM). PASS and its modified version have been applied on the poly(A) site prediction for Arabidopsis and rice , respectively. Another classification based model called poly(A) site classifier (PAC) was developed for green alga Chlamydomonas reinhardtii .also developed a classification-based command-line tool called polyA-iEP to predict poly(A) sites in Arabidopsis. To our knowledge, most of the aforementioned tools were implemented as standalone programs with command-line interfaces,Seven of these species are previously non-characterized in terms of their poly(A) signals and poly(A) sites.For prediction purposes, the positive data set was generated from poly(A) sites in 3 0 untranslated regions (3 0-UTRs). Random sequences and sequences from 5 0-UTRs or coding sequences were used as control datasets (described in Supplementary Section S4). Part of the sequences in the known poly(A) site datasets were randomly selected for model training. Part of the rest of the sequences from the positive ploy(A) datasets and the control datasets were used to estimate sensitivity (SN) and specificity (SP) (described in Supplementary Section S4). Similar to previous studies , a compromise between SN and SP was used to evaluate the model performance. Additional indexes including Matthews correlation coefficient, the area under the receiver operating characteristic curve, Fmeasure were also employed for a more comprehensive evaluation of the performance. Cross value of SN and SP ranges from 0.80 to 0.95 . The variation of performance among different species may due to the distinct set of poly(A) signals used in the respective species. In addition, compared with previous prediction tool, PASS for Arabidopsis and rice , PASPA obtains higher performance with better flexibility. More details about the model evaluation are given in Supplementary Section S5. 
