Sequence analysis Pclust: protein network visualization highlighting experimental data One approach to infer functions of new proteins from their homologs utilizes visualization of an all-against-all pairwise similarity network (A2ApsN) that exploits the speed of BLAST and avoids the complexity of multiple sequence alignment. However, identifying functions of the protein clusters in A2ApsN is never trivial, due to a lack of linking characterized proteins to their relevant information in current software packages. Given the database errors introduced by automatic annotation transfer, functional deduction should be made from proteins with experimental studies, i.e. reference proteins. Here, we present a web server, termed Pclust, which provides a user-friendly interface to visualize the A2ApsN, placing emphasis on such refer-ence proteins and providing access to their full information in source databases, e.g. articles in PubMed. The identification of reference proteins and the ease of cross-database linkage will facilitate understanding the functions of protein clusters in the network, thus promoting interpretation of proteins of interest. Availability: The Pclust server is freely available at http://prodata.A common practice to formulate hypotheses for a protein of unknown function includes searching for annotations among homologous proteins. Although sequence similarity does not necessarily correlate with functional similarity , all-against-all pairwise similarity network (A2ApsN) works best to illustrate functional relationships among large numbers of proteins , and meanwhile avoids computational complexity and problems of aligning non-homologous sequences . Software packages, such as CLANS , Pythoscape and Cytoscape , provide powerful repositories to manage the A2ApsN. However, they require either programming basics or expertise in program setups to generate the network (detailed comparison in the Supplementary Material). Numerous efforts aim to visualize the proteinprotein interaction (PPI) network . But these packages build the network by PPI data (not by sequence similarity) and assign functions by analysing the network structure, such as dissecting functional modules . Given the high misannotation rate in current databases , the simple protein descriptions that current packages offer are somewhat suspect, which hinders the understanding of the protein clusters. Thus, to avoid working with a network of uncertainty, one has to tediously verify the functions of nodes in the network before getting into interesting biology. Here, we developed a web server named Pclust for visualization of the A2ApsN, which emphasizes those reference proteins with experimental studies. Pclust works with the Seq2Ref server to identify the reference proteins and highlight them in the network. The web interface bypasses the pain of software installation and the requirement of programming expertise. The highlighted reference proteins and easy access to their functional studies simplify the process of relating functions to protein clusters, thus facilitating hypothesis driven research of proteins of interest.Pclust has four modes; a user can specify the input as (i) a single sequence(iv) customized network data. (The input interface is shown in Supplementary.) The flow chart for each mode is available in SupplementaryS5. The four above modes are designed to provide A2ApsNs (i) for any single sequence; (ii) with an advanced interface similar to CLANS; (iii) for previously generated Seq2Ref jobs; and (iv) with a customized input that grants users the flexibility to design. An email is required to keep track of the job submission. Once the network is ready, an email containing the result link will be sent to the provided address.(current E-value cutoff: 2e-38) shows the interface for an A2ApsN, as well as an example where the input protein (brown node), annotated as mandelate racemase (gij17987990), should be a fuconate dehydratase, as previously described . (Another practical case is available in the Supplementary Material.) Merely reading the brief protein descriptions within the cluster, such as RTS beta protein, mandelate racemase and enolase superfamily member (as in the CLANS interface), results in confusion about the function of the cluster. Pclust alleviates this confusion by highlighting the reference proteins and referring to their annotation sources linked by our server (details available in the Supplementary Material). For example, the cluster circled incontaining the questionable mandelate racemase (brown) includes two solved crystal structures of known fuconate dehydratases with provided links to their experimental data. Thus, with the convenience of locating reference proteins in A2ApsN and accessing their database links, more accurate hypotheses about the function of protein queries can be generated, potentiating biological discovery. 
