Databases and ontologies PHISTO: pathogen–host interaction search tool Knowledge of pathogenhost protein interactions is required to better understand infection mechanisms. The pathogen host interaction search tool (PHISTO) is a web-accessible platform that provides relevant information about pathogenhost interactions (PHIs). It enables access to the most up-to-date PHI data for all pathogen types for which experimentally verified protein interactions with human are available. The platform also offers integrated tools for visu-alization of PHI networks, graphtheoretical analysis of targeted human proteins, BLAST search and text mining for detecting missing experimental methods. PHISTO will facilitate PHI studies that provide potential therapeutic targets for infectious diseases.The interactions between the proteins of infectious microorganisms, pathogens and their human hosts allow the microorganisms to manipulate human cellular mechanisms to their own advantage, resulting in infection in the host organism. The recent advances in high-throughput protein interaction detection methods have led to the production of large-scale interspecies protein protein interaction (PPI) data of pathogenhuman systems. Currently, there are a number of pathogenhost interaction (PHI) resources that are specific to some pathogens. The only available resource to access all PHI data in a single database does not offer any additional functionality to analyze PHI networks. We have developed pathogen host interaction search tool (PHISTO) to serve as an up-to-date and functionally enhanced source of PHI data through a userfriendly interface. PHIs in PHISTO are imported from several PPI databases using the PSICQUIC tool . Text mining is used to label PHIs extracted without any information on interaction detection method. Tools for visualization of small PHI networks and graphtheoretical analysis of targeted human proteins may enable users to gain crucial insights on infection mechanisms. The BLAST interface offers to search for orthologous PHIs for pathogens lacking experimental data.With regular monthly data updates and complete coverage of all data available for each pathogen type, PHISTO will always provide unified access to up-to-date PHI data. Otherwise, gathering such information would require careful and tedious data integration. To our knowledge, PHISTO is the first PHI tool that uses text mining to identify the interaction detection methods of PHIs that have not been originally annotated with such information. Additionally, PHI results visualized as a bipartite graph allow users to capture PHI mechanisms (i.e. most connected pathogen/host proteins can be easily observed at a glance). The sequence search option, BLAST, makes it possible to retrieve homologous PHIs. After homolog pathogen proteins in PHISTO are found, interacting human protein partners of the homolog proteins may be assigned as putative interactors for the protein under investigation. Finally, the distributions of degree and betweenness centrality values in the graph analysis tool give crucial insights on attacking strategies of pathogens during infections . Our goal with PHISTO is to provide a centralized and up-to-date platform for studying pathogenhost protein interaction systems with future curation of PHIs from literature by text mining and additional advanced analysis tools for PHI networks. Funding: Bog aziciazici University Research Funds Project 5554D, Marie Curie FP7-Reintegration-Grants, Ekin Kimya Tic. Ltd. S ti. and Elginkan Foundation.Conflict of Interest: none declared. 
