Piecewise linear approximation of protein structures using the principle of minimum message length Simple and concise representations of protein-folding patterns provide powerful abstractions for visualizations, comparisons, classifications, searching and aligning structural data. Structures are often abstracted by replacing standard secondary structural featuresthat is, helices and strands of sheetby vectors or linear segments. Relying solely on standard secondary structure may result in a significant loss of structural information. Further, traditional methods of simplification crucially depend on the consistency and accuracy of external methods to assign secondary structures to protein coordinate data. Although many methods exist automatically to identify secondary structure, the impreciseness of definitions, along with errors and inconsistencies in experimental structure data, drastically limit their applicability to generate reliable simplified representations, especially for structural comparison. This article introduces a mathematically rigorous algorithm to delineate protein structure using the elegant statistical and inductive inference framework of minimum message length (MML). Our method generates consistent and statistically robust piecewise linear explanations of protein coordinate data, resulting in a powerful and concise representation of the structure. The delineation is completely independent of the approaches of using hydrogen-bonding patterns or inspecting local substructural geometry that the current methods use. Indeed, as is common with applications of the MML criterion, this method is free of parameters and thresholds, in striking contrast to the existing programs which are often beset by them. The analysis of results over a large number of proteins suggests that the method produces consistent delineation of structures that encompasses, among others, the segments corresponding to standard secondary structure.With the rapid growth in the corpus of known structures, concise representations are increasingly preferred to inspect and analyze protein folding patterns . At the core of this simplification is the idea that proteins contain repetitive substructural elements and that the essence of a fold lies in the assembly and To whom correspondence should be addressed. interaction of these elements . The appearance of some of these elements arises from the periodicity in the patterns of hydrogen bonds between backbone nitrogen and carbonyl groups along the protein polypeptide chain. Among the standard secondary structure definitions are: helix (-helix, -helix and 3 10-helix) and strand of sheet . Ideally, the spatial trace of -Carbon (C ) atoms of standard secondary structure show a linear trend allowing them to be abstracted using vectors or line segments, without much loss of structural information about the fold. The common practice is to fit an axis to a helix and a least-square line to C or main chain atoms of strands of sheet . Replacement of secondary structural elements with line segments is therefore one of the common methods to abstract protein structures and construct concise representation of their folding patterns. The number of standard secondary structural elements observed in a protein is typically an order of magnitude smaller than the number of residues in a chain. Therefore methods that utilize concise representations clearly benefit from a massive space and computational saving, especially when comparing and analyzing structures on a large scale . Methods that abstract protein structure at the level of secondary structure generally rely on external programs that can automatically assign secondary structures to coordinate data. However, accurate identification and assignment of secondary structure is an inexact process . Although definitions based on hydrogen bonding provides some rigor in assigning secondary structure, the standard definition of what constitutes a hydrogen bond is based on the notion of bond energy whose measurement can be imprecise and acutely sensitive even to small differences in the position of nitrogen and carbonyl atoms, especially the carbonyl oxygen positions. Two popular programs that use hydrogen bonding as a basis for assignment of secondary structure are DSSP and STRIDE . On the other hand, secondary structure can be defined using geometric features such as distances and dihedral angles of C atoms along the backbone in addition to other local structural features. In fact, there is a direct correlation between patterns of hydrogen bonding and the geometry that arise out of them. However, secondary structural elements can deviate substantially from ideal geometry, therefore posing severe challenges to detect such elements using geometric features alone. Among the methods that rely primarily on geometry to assign secondary structure arePage: i44 i43i51In the previous sections, we have demonstrated an efficient and statistically robust algorithm to simplify a protein structure with piecewise linear segments. We implemented the described algorithm (in C++). Our implementation is available from http://www.csse .monash.edu.au/karun/pmml/. We evaluated our method using a non-redundant dataset containing 15 399 protein structures obtained from the protein data bank . (The non-redundancy here implies that no two structures in this dataset share a sequence identity 65.) This dataset was culled using the program PISCES . The list of proteins structures in the dataset and the results of their delineation produced by our method can be obtained from the aforementioned link.gives the distribution of the measure of simplification of structures over the entire dataset. For a structure, the measure of simplification is the ratio of number of line segments identified by the program over the number of residues in the structure. On an average. Geometric profiles of ideal secondary structures used to classify coarsely the delineation identified by the program. and are average backbone dihedral angles. n is the periodicity of the local structure. is the rise. p is the pitchthe respective secondary structure assignments using DSSP and STRIDE. We note that both these programs assign secondary structure definitions at a residue level, while the coarse assignment for our method described above is at a segment level. Therefore, to enable a comparison between the methods we assign all residues within a segment to the segment level secondary structure state.gives the concordance of Helix 6 and Strand assignments between DSSP, STRIDE, and our method, PMML. Although even a coarse segment level assignment by our method produced a satisfactory concordance with DSSP and STRIDE, there is still a disagreement of 15 between PMML and the other two methods. Inspecting these differences we note that the majority of them came from the terminal parts of the segments delineated by our program. Therefore, we refine the coarse level assignment produced by PMML using the hydrogen bonding patterns of residues within each segment to reassign the secondary structure state at a residue level. We use a simple proximity (of backbone nitrogen and carbonyl groups) and angle (of N, O, C atoms) based computation of hydrogen bonds. Comparing our refined assignments at a residue level with DSSP and STRIDE we notice a substantial improvement in the concordance of helix and stand assignments with DSSP and STRIDE. (See rows 3 and 4 in.) We emphasize that although PMML can be used to generate protein secondary structure assignments, its real aim is to generate concise representations of structures, irrespective of the nature of the segments of which they are composed. For instance, PMML could be applied to RNA structures without needing any appeal to the types of substructure anticipated. Manually evaluating the delineation of a large number of structures we notice that although PMMLs delineation identifies the regions of helix and strand consistently, there remain small discrepancies in assigning precise beginning and end residuesThe SSEs in the rows follow the order of their appearance along the chain of the protein from its N-to C-terminus. The column wwPDB gives the residue ranges of various SSEs as indicated in the wwPDB file 5NLL. The column PMML gives the corresponding residue ranges of the segmentation produced by PMML. of secondary structure elements as ascertained by an expert. To highlight these differences consider the following example of the delineation produced by PMML.shows the structure of oxidized Clostridium beijerinckii flavodoxin. This protein binds a cofactor, flavin mononucleotide (FMN). Flavodoxin is a small / protein, containing a 5-stranded parallel -sheet ( 1 ,..., 5 ), with two helices packed against each face of the sheet ( A , E and C , D ). There is also a short helix ( B ) located near the N-terminus of the protein. Different segments produced by PMML are shown in different colors. The elements of secondary structure shown as thick ribbons are the secondary structure assignments taken from the structures wwPDB file (5NLL).gives the residue ranges (that is, start and end residues) for each secondary structural element (SSE) of the flavodoxin structure listed in its wwPDB file. The residue ranges of the corresponding segmentation produced by PMML is also presented in the table. Broadly, the program correctly assigns segments to the SSEs. However, minor differences can be i50We have presented a novel and efficient method to delineate protein structures using the MML framework; MML is tolerant to measurement error and other inaccuracies. The model used in this work is independent of preconceived notions of what substructures are being sought to simplify the observed coordinate data. Our method maximizes the economy of representation while minimizing the loss of information, taking into account even the loop regions of proteins. Analysis of the delineations of a large number of protein structures suggests that the method is consistent in, among others, delineating standard secondary structures. The concise representations produced by this method have a potential use for rapid and accurate structure comparison and lookup. An implementation of our program is available from http://www.csse.monash.edu.au/karun/pmml/. 
