PinaColada: peptide–inhibitor ant colony ad-hoc design algorithm Motivation: Design of proteinprotein interaction (PPI) inhibitors is a major challenge in Structural Bioinformatics. Peptides, especially short ones (515 amino acid long), are natural candidates for inhibition of proteinprotein complexes due to several attractive features such as high structural compatibility with the protein binding site (mimicking the surface of one of the proteins), small size and the ability to form strong hotspot binding connections with the protein surface. Efficient rational peptide design is still a major challenge in computer aided drug design, due to the huge space of possible sequences, which is exponential in the length of the peptide, and the high flexibility of peptide conformations. Results: In this article we present PinaColada, a novel computational method for the design of pep-tide inhibitors for proteinprotein interactions. We employ a version of the ant colony optimization heuristic, which is used to explore the exponential space (20 n) of length n peptide sequences, in combination with our fast robotics motivated PepCrawler algorithm, which explores the conform-ational space for each candidate sequence. PinaColada is being run in parallel, on a DELL PowerEdge 2.8 GHZ computer with 20 cores and 256 GB memory, and takes up to 24 h to design a peptide of 5-15 amino acids length. Availability and implementation: An online server available at: http://bioinfo3d.cs.tau.ac.il/PinaColada/.Proteinprotein interactions (PPIs) play a crucial role in many cellular processes and pathways. Thus, development of small molecules that affect PPIs has become an intensive research field in Structural Bioinformatics and Computer Aided Drug Design. The task is to discover small molecules that will block a specific PPI, without harming the function (e.g. catalytic activity) of the target proteins . Some of those desired inhibitors include small-molecule inhibitors and short peptide inhibitors. An interaction between two proteins usually consists of a large interface without a well characterized binding pocket . Peptides could be good starting points for new leads in rational design of inhibitory drugs by mimicking part of the interacting surface of one of the proteins (Mochly). Peptides, both natural and non-natural, have been used to inhibit PPIs. Some experimental studies have investigated inhibitory peptides as competitive docking partners . Some studies found inhibitory peptides for various kinds of interactions, including membrane protein interactions , proteinDNA binding , signaling pathways , etc. These studies have been conducted both in vitro and in vivo. Many biological studies that try to find potent inhibitory peptides, used screening of a random peptide library to explore the potential sequence space. Such a method could be potentially improved, by exploring a pool of peptides which have already been in-silico validated, thus significantly decreasing the search space. This emphasizes the need for a rational algorithm to design a pool of in-silico validated suggestions thus reducing significantly the search space of in-vitro peptide design. A common method to design inhibitory peptides is to extract a short linear fragment from one of the proteins in a given PPI complex . We also use this approach for the derivation of an initial template for our design algorithm. Another validation for this approach comes from studies showing that, the interaction energy of many key processes and pathways is dominated by proteinpeptide interactions . Moreover, the binding of intrinsically disordered proteins is partly or mainly peptide mediated . However, many trials show that non-mutated peptides extracted from the interface do not achieve high enough binding affinity themselves. In some case studies randomly selected mutations improved the binding energy of linear derived peptides. In other cases, peptides were stapled either to make a cyclic peptide, or to ensure that the peptide keeps a helical shape . Nevertheless, evidence suggests that linear derived peptides are a good target-specific starting point for peptide design . In the recent years, there have been major developments in the related field of proteinpeptide docking. Promising algorithms for peptide binding site prediction, which play a significant role in peptide design have been developed. These include algorithms for peptide binding site prediction, such as PepSite2 , algorithms for local docking and refinement such as PepCrawler , FlexPepDock and algorithms for ab-initio peptide docking such as FlexPepDock ab-initio , GalaxyDock and pepATTRACT . There have also been several developments in knowledge based computational design of peptides. However, most of them deal with target-specific design, such as inhibitors for the well studied PDZ, SH2, SH3 domains which have simple binding sequence motifs such as PxxP, the NOTCH signaling pathway , MHC class II molecules , or T-cell epitopes . A comprehensive review byencompasses a lot of the variability in this field. In this article, we present PinaColada a novel computational method for inhibitory peptide design. Given an input proteinprotein complex, our algorithm extracts a suitable initial peptide from one of the proteins, with high affinity to bind to the other. Then, it transforms the initial peptide through a sequence of mutations which are optimized by the ant-colony method . The goal is to find the highest affinity inhibitory peptide sequences for the given PPI. We deal with the problem of predicting the peptide conformation and free energy of the interaction with the receptor protein, by applying the PepCrawler algorithm , which is a fast refinement (local docking) algorithm for peptideprotein interactions. We also let the user specify biological constraints for the resulting peptides. Such constraints may consider solubility, hydrophobicity, helicality and other more specific constraints. The output of the algorithm is a list of suggested peptide sequences to bind the target and inhibit the interaction. A webserver, which enables users to apply PinaColada has been set up at: http://bioinfo3d.cs.tau.ac.il/PinaColada/.To qualitatively assess our method, we compared it to a computational study by Smith and Kortemme (later addressed as SK) as well as evaluated its ability to predict the FGDF binding motif. Smith and Kortemme explored the sequence space of peptides recognized by PDZ domains. They used known complexes from the PDB which included a peptide (or protein) bound to a PDZ domain. Then, they extracted peptides of length 5 from these complexes. SK used the design module of the Rosetta backrub method to predict additional length 5 peptide sequences which bind to the corresponding PDZ domains. Then, SK compared their results with phage display experiments which yielded a good agreement, namely the sequence profiles of peptides that bind to the same domains looked similar in many cases. We run PinaColada on nine out of the PDZ domains from that study (those that were received from X-ray crystallography). Due to the random fashion of our PinaColadaalgorithm, we ran it five times (independently) for each peptide. We sorted the results of the 5 runs according to their computational energy. Then, we considered the most frequently appearing amino acid in each position, calculated over the 100 peptides with best computational energy. We compared it with SKs most frequent amino acids and with the phage display. Inwe can see the results of SK, PinaColada and the phage display for the nine peptides. We defined a hit if our (or SK) most frequent amino acid at a certain position is the same as the most frequent amino acid in the phage display. Inwe present the summery of total hits and also the number of hits per peptide. Remarkably, even for non-hits, we often got the same most frequent acid as SK. In 24 positions out of 45 (53.3) we got the same amino acid (either hit or non-hit) as SK, validating a good correlation between the two methods. PinaColada was further tested whether it could detect peptide binding motifs which are abundant in proteinpeptide interactions in nature. We tested it upon a recent crystal structure of the NTF2like domain of G3BP (human Ras GTPase SH3 Binding Protein) which binds to a peptide containing a FGDF (PHE-GLY-ASP-PHE) motif . We started PinaColada without any initial pheromones, which means no initial knowledge about the peptide sequence, in order to see if PinaColada would design peptides which include the motif or a part of it. Indeed, we saw that in almost all the results, the two PHE residues were placed correctly in the high scoring peptides, including the first ranked result. In the second position, the most common amino acid in the results was CYS which differs from GLY only by two atoms. In the second ranked result, there is GLU in the third position. According toASP could likely be substituted by GLU and USP10 (amphibian and fish proteins) contain GLU in that position.depicts the native complex (from the PDB) and PinaColadas second result. One could see that the aromatic rings of the PHE residues are located very close in the two peptides. Furthermore, in the complex taken from the PDB, there are 43 contacts (atoms in the peptide which are closer than 0.4 A to an atom from the receptor), out of which 23 are from the two PHE residues. In the first design of PinaColada there were 104 contacts, out of which 59 from the two PHE residues, and in the second design 69 PHE contacts out of 129 contacts. Moreover, the computational energy of the two best ranked designs of PinaColada were-66.93 and-68.57 as compared to-56.09 for the native one, and their funnel score were 9.20 and 8.34 as compared to 4.06 for the native one.presents the behavior of the energy and funnel scores of a typical run of PinaColada. We could see that the energy reaches a minimum at round 24 out of 40, but the average energy of a round of ants, continues to decrease even thereafter. This is important because it means that even after achieving the minimum of a certain round, the ants are still improving on average, and thus the reported list of k top performing ants might still change. We could also see, that the average funnel score increases gradually as the algorithm. This table depicts the most frequently appearing amino acid in each position, calculated over the 100 peptides with best computational energy, as well as the most frequent appearing amino acid in the SK study and in the phage displayproceeds. The funnel score of the best ant of a round fluctuates, due to the fact that we look for the energy minimum, and not necessarily the optimal funnel. Furthermore, we see that the funnel score of the best ant of a round has several local maxima (with the highest one at rounds 14, 27 and 39). Most of the highest funnel scores of best ants, correspond to local minima in the best ant energy score. At the moment, we do not have yet in-vitro validation of the results obtained by our method. However, the energy and funnel calculation of PepCrawler were tested on the PeptiDB dataset . This dataset includes numerous examples of protein peptide complexes from the PDB, while not containing many redundancies. This served as a validation of the funnel score as a measure of peptide binding prediction. The average funnel score of all 103 input complexes was 8.41, and only 13 complexes had a funnel score lower than 5. The experiments on the PeptiDB and a decoy benchmark have shown clear correlation between the funnel steepness score and binding affinity. Running time: We have measured PinaColadas performance, on a DELL PowerEdge 2.8 GHZ computer with 20 cores and 256 GB memory, running the ants of each round in parallel, while the different rounds run sequentially. In our experiments, we used 35 ants in each round, for up to 40 rounds (afterward, there is no significant improvement in the results). Each round lasts between 10 and 20 min, depending on the protein and peptide size and other parameters. The whole run could take up to 24 h to design a peptide with length of between 5 and 15 amino acids. The running time could be further reduced by using several multi-core computers, and increasing the number of ants in each round, while decreasing the number of rounds. 
