Sequence analysis PING 2.0: an R/Bioconductor package for nucleosome positioning using next-generation sequencing data MNase-Seq and ChIP-Seq have evolved as popular techniques to study chromatin and histone modification. Although many tools have been developed to identify enriched regions, software tools for nucleosome positioning are still limited. We introduce a flexible and powerful open-source R package, PING 2.0, for nucleosome positioning using MNase-Seq data or MNase or sonicated ChIP-Seq data combined with either single-end or paired-end sequencing. PING uses a model-based approach, which enables nucleosome predictions even in the presence of low read counts. We illustrate PING using two paired-end datasets from Saccharomyces cerevisiae and compare its performance with nucleR and ChIPseqR. Availability: PING 2.0 is available from the Bioconductor website at http://bioconductor.org. It can run on Linux, Mac and Windows.The nucleosome is the basic structural unit of chromatin, which is composed of a nucleosomal core including 147 bp of DNA wrapped around a central histone octamer (H2A, H2B, H3 and H4) and linker DNA connecting nucleosomal core to the next. Nucleosomes control cellular processes by affecting the accessibility of proteins to the DNA, which can act on gene expression and other DNA-dependent processes . Projects like ENCODE (ENCODE Project) have generated large amounts of ChIP-Seq and MNase-Seq data that can be used to improve our understanding of nucleosome positioning and its impact on gene regulation. However, these data require efficient tools that can be used regardless of the experimental protocols employed. Several statistical approaches were recently developed for analyzing nucleosome-based data.introduced the Template Filter method that models forward and reverse reads based on predefined peak shapes.developed the Nucleosome Positioning from Sequencing (NPS) method that uses read pile-ups followed by wavelet de-noising for identifying positioned nucleosomes. More recent pile-upbased approaches include the ChIPseqR and nucleR R packages, available from Bioconductor. In a Bayesian context,have developed NOrMAL, which uses mixture models to infer nucleosome positions. All the tools described above were originally developed for single-end (SE) sequencing data, where data provide only one side of DNA fragments, and as such the length of the DNA fragments must be provided as input or estimated from the data. To resolve this ambiguity and give more information, paired-end (PE) protocols have been developed and are gradually being highlighted in experiments . Because PE data provide important information about DNA fragment length, they can potentially lead to more precise estimates of nucleosome positions , though formal comparisons of nucleome positioning obtained from SE and PE data are still lacking. Here we present a new software tool for nucleosome positioning, PING 2.0, which extends our probabilistic framework for SE ChIPSeq and MNase-Seq data . PING 2.0 is a major update of an early (unpublished) version of the software and includes a novel statistical framework for PE data, new functions for pre-processing and reading raw data, and better integration with other Bioconductor packages. The result is a complete framework for nucleosome positioning within Bioconductor that can handle sonicated and MNase protocols combined with either SE or PE sequencing. We compare PING 2.0 with two other Bioconductor packages, nucleR and ChIPseqR using two novel PE Saccharomyces cerevisiae datasets (available from GEO: GSE47073) generated specifically for this work.We applied PING 2.0 to two PE S.cerevisiae datasets generated for this article (Total and H2A.Z MNase) and compared its performance with nucleR and ChIPseqR. As can be seen in, the PE version of PING leads to the detection of more nucleosomes that are supported by additional variation in the pile-up profile. However, the SE version also leads to accurate nucleosome positioning. This is confirmed in our comparison study where we show that PING 2.0 SE-based predictions match their PE-based ones well and better than nucleR and ChIPseqR. In particular, nucleRs PE predictions appear to be biased toward high-density regions where the algorithms tend to predict many overlapping nucleosomes (Supplementary Figs S3 and S4). In our comparison, we also looked at the stability of the predictions when the datasets are subsampled. Globally, nucleR and PING lead to stable predictions for both SE and PE, while ChIPseqRs predictions are more noisy and poorly match the results from the full data. See Supplementary Material for more details.. Nucleosome positions identified by PING in a subset of ChrI from our Total MNase data using both SE and PE data. The SE data were generated by simply discarding one PE read at random, and the corresponding pile-up profile was obtained by extended reads to an average length of the PE DNA fragments. The number of nucleosomes estimated from PE is greater, as it provides more detailed information as shown by the PE pile-up profile 
