Databases and ontologies Planform: an application and database of graph-encoded planarian regenerative experiments Understanding the mechanisms governing the regener-ation capabilities of many organisms is a fundamental interest in biology and medicine. An ever-increasing number of manipulation and molecular experiments are attempting to discover a comprehensive model for regeneration, with the planarian flatworm being one of the most important model species. Despite much effort, no comprehensive , constructive, mechanistic models exist yet, and it is now clear that computational tools are needed to mine this huge dataset. However, until now, there is no database of regenerative experiments, and the current genotypephenotype ontologies and databases are based on textual descriptions, which are not understandable by computers. To overcome these difficulties, we present here Planform (Planarian formalization), a manually curated database and software tool for planarian regenerative experiments, based on a mathematical graph formalism. The database contains more than a thousand experiments from the main publications in the planarian literature. The software tool provides the user with a graphical interface to easily interact with and mine the database. The presented system is a valuable resource for the regeneration community and, more importantly, will pave the way for the application of novel artificial intelligence tools to extract knowledge from this dataset. Availability: The database and software tool are freely available atThe main goal in regenerative biology is to find the control mechanisms that allow many organisms to regenerate missing appendages or organs, including the brain. Planarian worms are of special interest because, despite their complexity (they possess a brain, eyes, sensory and digestive systems, musculature, etc.), they exhibit an outstanding regenerative capacity: cutting a worm in many pieces results in a regenerated complete worm from each piece . However, despite the current outstanding efforts of surgical, pharmacological and molecular genetic experiments, no model exist that can explain more than one or two aspects of planarian regeneration . What is needed now for the discovery of constructive, mechanistic and predictive models of regeneration are automated computational tools and a centralized database that unambiguously stores experimental assays and outcomes in a formal structure, permitting efficient retrieval of the developmental knowledge acquired during4100 years of planarian experiments. Certainly, the goals of true Systems Biology require the ability to manipulate information about higher-order properties of pattern control in addition to gene-and protein-level data. Ontologies have been proposed to standardize the vocabulary to describe phenotypes and are in use in valuable databases linking genomic and phenotype data . However, current phenotype ontologies are based in well-defined textual descriptions, which are not adequate for regeneration data and cannot be interpreted by automated algorithms. Here, we present a novel database based on a mathematical graph formalism, which can describe unambiguously the geometric relations between morphological parts, and a computational tool to mine and extract knowledge from this vast amount of data from the regeneration field.At the time of writing, the centralized database contains 1139 experiments manually curated from 74 publications from the scientific literature, and we are continually expanding it.shows screenshots of Planform. The main window lists all the experiments, manipulation, morphologies, drugs, RNAi, species and publications stored in the database . A form is used to introduce the characteristics of an experiment (publication, drugs, manipulation, resultant morphologies, etc.); these characteristics can be selected from the database if they are similar to previously introduced experiments, or defined anew . An experiment can define several different morphological outcomes, depending on the penetrance of the treatment and the elapsed regeneration time. To facilitate the interpretation of the formalism by the user, Planform draws cartoon representations of the formal morphologies and manipulations in real time, so that the user can immediately see a schematic of the phenotype being described. To introduce new morphologies and manipulations , the tool presents an interactive graphical representation, which permits one to drag vertices and parameters, as well as to create and delete regions/organs, and perform other edits. The user can introduce a new morphology or manipulation by starting from scratch or by copying and editing an existing one. Importantly, Planform includes a search module that permits a scientist to query for experiments, worm manipulations, regenerated morphologies, etc. stored in the database. A query is defined by the type of entity to search (experiments, manipulations, morphologies, drugs, RNAi, species or publications), a characteristic to search for (name, publication title or year, drug or RNAi names or number of specific organs or regions), a comparator operator (contains, equal, less or greater) and a free text with which to compare the operator. In this way, any scientist can easily find specific results contained in the database according to a familiar criterion. 
