Structural bioinformatics PLI: a web-based tool for the comparison of protein-ligand interactions observed on PDB structures Motivation: A large fraction of the entries contained in the Protein Data Bank describe proteins in complex with low molecular weight molecules such as physiological compounds or synthetic drugs. In many cases, the same molecule is found in distinct protein-ligand complexes. There is an increasing interest in Medicinal Chemistry in comparing protein binding sites to get insight on interactions that modulate the binding specificity, as this structural information can be correlated with other experimental data of biochemical or physiological nature and may help in rational drug design. Results: The web service protein-ligand interaction presented here provides a tool to analyse and compare the binding pockets of hom-ologous proteins in complex with a selected ligand. The information is deduced from protein-ligand complexes present in the Protein Data Bank and stored in the underlying database.About one fourth of the entries deposited with the Protein Data Bank (PDB;) represent proteins in complex with small molecules (not including common salts and compounds commonly used in molecular and structural biology). The number of these ligands, in the PDB referred to as heterogeneous compounds, is currently 14 000. Binding specificity is achieved by the formation of a network of interactions between the protein and the ligand, which depends on the shape and on the physicochemical nature of the amino acids forming the binding pocket, as well as on structure flexibility of both ligand and protein. In particular, 17 of the ligands present in the PDB are found in complex with distinct proteins. The proteins involved may either share homology with each other or belong to distinct families. In the first case, it is possible to establish a relationship of structural equivalence among the amino acids forming the binding pockets; this allows to analyse the residueDrug design and lead optimization often rely on information obtained by structural biology methods; this information may integrate that obtained with other approaches such as those used to generate pharmacophore models (e.g.). In spite of the abundant, and rapidly growing, structural information in the PDB describing the interaction of ligands with distinct target proteins, there is a substantial lack of tools for the comparison of the binding pockets of homologous proteins not requiring the use of programs of structural superposition and significant expertise in the field of structural biology. Furthermore, the structural superposition and comparison becomes rapidly time-consuming if the number of homologous protein-ligand complexes exceeds four. The PLI web service provides and aids to carry out this comparison (see). 
