Gene expression PREDA: an R-package to identify regional variations in genomic data Chromosomal patterns of genomic signals represent molecular fingerprints that may reveal how the local structural organization of a genome impacts the functional control mechanisms. Thus, the integrative analysis of multiple sources of genomic data and information deepens the resolution and enhances the interpretation of stand-alone high-throughput data. In this note, we present PREDA (Position RElated Data Analysis), an R package for detecting regional variations in genomics data. PREDA identifies relevant chromosomal patterns in high-throughput data using a smoothing approach that accounts for distance and density variability of genomics features. Custom-designed data structures allow efficiently managing diverse signals in different genomes. A variety of smoothing functions and statistics empower flexible and robust workflows. The modularity of package design allows an easy deployment of custom analytical pipelines. Tabular and graphical representations facilitate downstream biological interpretation of results. Availability: PREDA is available in Bioconductor and atHigh-throughput technologies allow the complete exploration of DNA and RNA molecules at genome-wide scale, thus offering the opportunity to decipher the control mechanisms underlying the functional utilization of a genome. Although hundred of studies fully demonstrated the relevance of bioinformatics in analyzing each data type alone, fewer approaches have been proposed for the integrative analysis of genomics signals and genome structural organization. Some of these methods specifically address the identification of gene expression patterns at the chromosomal level , others the integrative analysis of paired DNA copy number and gene expression data . To whom correspondence should be addressed.Here, we describe PREDA, an R/Bioconductor package for detecting regional variations of genomic features from the integrative analysis of high-throughput data and genome local structural organization. The program implements a generalized version of the integrative strategy first introduced byand further improved byto identify and prioritize targets for functional studies from diverse type of highthroughput data in different genomes . PREDA integrates high-throughput signals and structural information using a non-linear kernel regression with adaptive bandwidth that efficiently accounts for the density variability of genomics data. The integrative analysis is performed through a modular and flexible framework that, accommodating different types of smoothing functions and statistics, facilitates its adoption in a broad spectrum of genomics studies. The potential applications range from the study of pathological processes involving genome structure modifications, as for chromosomal amplifications and deletions in cancer (e.g. integrative analysis of DNA copy number and gene expression), to the analysis of physiological mechanisms regulating genome utilization (e.g. identification of genes colocalized and co-expressed; analysis of tiling arrays). A detailed description and discussion of the package is reported in the Supplementary Material.PREDA generalizes and strengthens previously proposed methods for the integrative analysis of high-throughput data and genome structural information . The modularity of the package allows implementing different type of smoothing functions and statistics, thus facilitating its application to different genomics data and genomes. The core components of the method, i.e. (i) the data smoothing with non-linear regression functions; (ii) the permutation schema to evaluate the significance of results; (iii) the statistics computed on each gene and used as input for the analysis, have been rendered of general applicability and enhanced over prior implementations. The modifications aimed at improving the sensitivity of the procedure in detecting small significant genomic regions and at controlling false positive results. The methodological refinements were tested on simulated datasets and the results are discussed in details in the Supplementary Material. Results indicate that the overall procedure for position-related data analysis is robust to modifications of input statistics and can be adopted in a number of different biological problems. However, simulations revealed that selecting the optimal smoothing strategy might be critical to improve sensitivity and reduce the FDR. As such, several alternative options for data smoothing have been implemented in the PREDA package along with a flexible and modular framework of R functions that would allow end users to define custom smoothing methods, when needed. 
