Predicting protein contact map using evolutionary and physical constraints by integer programming Motivation: Protein contact map describes the pairwise spatial and functional relationship of residues in a protein and contains key information for protein 3D structure prediction. Although studied extensively , it remains challenging to predict contact map using only sequence information. Most existing methods predict the contact map matrix element-by-element, ignoring correlation among contacts and physical feasibility of the whole-contact map. A couple of recent methods predict contact map by using mutual information, taking into consideration contact correlation and enforcing a sparsity restraint, but these methods demand for a very large number of sequence homologs for the protein under consideration and the resultant contact map may be still physically infeasible. Results: This article presents a novel method PhyCMAP for contact map prediction, integrating both evolutionary and physical restraints by machine learning and integer linear programming. The evolutionary restraints are much more informative than mutual information, and the physical restraints specify more concrete relationship among contacts than the sparsity restraint. As such, our method greatly reduces the solution space of the contact map matrix and, thus, significantly improves prediction accuracy. Experimental results confirm that PhyCMAP outperforms currently popular methods no matter how many sequence homologs are available for the protein under consideration. Availability:In this article, we say two residues of a protein are in contact if their Euclidean distance is58 A . The distance of two residues can be calculated using C or C atoms, corresponding to C-or Cbased contacts. A protein contact map is a binary L L matrix, where L is the protein length. In this matrix, an element with value 1 indicates the corresponding two residues are in contact; otherwise, they are not in contact. Protein contact map describes the pairwise spatial and functional relationship of residues in a protein. Predicting contact map using sequence information has been an active research topic in recent years partially because contact map is helpful for protein 3D structure prediction and protein model quality assessment . Protein contact map has also been used to study protein structure alignment . Many machine-learning methods have been developed for protein contact prediction in the past decades . For example, SVMSEQ uses support vector machines for contact prediction; NNcon uses a recursive neural network; SVMcon also uses support vector machines plus features derived from sequence homologs; Distill uses a 2D recursive neural network. Recently, CMAPpro (Di) uses a multi-layer neural network. Although different, these methods are common in that they predict the contact map matrix element-by-element, ignoring the correlation among contacts and also physical feasibility of the whole-contact map (physical constraints are not totally independent of contact correlation). A special type of physical constraint is that a contact map matrix must be sparse, i.e. the number of contacts in a protein is only linear in its length. Two recent methods [PSICOV and Evfold (predict contacts by using only mutual information (MI) derived from sequence homologs and enforcing the aforementioned sparsity constraint. However, both of them demand for a large number (at least several hundreds) of sequence homologs for the protein under prediction. This makes the predicted contacts not useful in protein modeling, as a (globular) protein with many sequence homologs usually has similar templates in PDB; thus, template-based models are of good quality and hard to be further improved using predicted contacts. Conversely, a protein without close templates in PDB, which may require contact prediction, usually has few sequence homologs even if millions of protein sequences are now available. Further, these two methods enforce only a simple sparsity constraint (i.e. the total number of contacts in a protein is small), ignoring many more concrete constraints. To name a few, one residue can have only a small number of contacts, depending on its secondary structure and neighboring residues. The number of contacts between two-strands is bounded by the strand length. Astro-Fold possibly is the first method that applies physical constraints, which implicitly imply the sparsity constraint used by PSICOV and Evfold, to contact map prediction. However, some of the physical constraints are too restrictive and possibly unrealistic. For example, it requires that a residue in one-strand can only be in contact with a residue in another-strand. More importantly, Astro-Fold does not take into consideration evolutionary information; thus, it significantly reduces its prediction accuracy. In this article, we present a novel method PhyCMAP for contact map prediction by integrating both evolutionary and physical constraints using machine learning, which permits non-commercial re-use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited. For commercial re-use, please contact journals.permissions@oup.com secondary structure and distance-dependent statistical potential. PhyCMAP then infers a given number of top contacts based on predicted contact probabilities by enforcing a set of realistic physical constraints on the contact map. These restraints specify more concrete relationship among contacts and also imply the sparsity restraint used by PSICOV and Evfold. By combining both evolutionary and physical constraints, our method greatly reduces the solution space of contact map and leads to much better prediction accuracy. Experimental results confirm that PhyCMAP outperforms currently popular methods no matter how many sequence homologs are available for the protein under prediction.Performance on the CASP10 set. As shown in, on the 36 hard CASP10 targets, our PhyCMAP exceeds the second best method CMAPpro by 57 in terms of the accuracy of the top five, L/10 and L/5 predicted contacts. The advantage of PhyCMAP over CMAPpro becomes smaller but still substantial when short-range contacts are excluded from consideration. PhyCMAP significantly outperforms NNcon, PSICOV and Evfold no matter how many predicted contacts are evaluated. PSICOV and Evfold almost fail on these hard CASP10 targets. By contrast, CMAPpro, NNcon and PhyCMAP still work, although they do not perform as well as on the whole CASP10 set. Note that both PSICOV and Evfold, two recent methods receiving a lot of attentions from the community, do not perform well on the CASP10 set. This is partially because they require a large number of sequence homologs for the protein under prediction. Nevertheless, most of the CASP targets, especially the hard ones, do not have so many sequence homologs because a protein with so many homologs likely has similar templates in PDB and thus, were not used by CASP. Relationship between prediction accuracy and the number of sequence homologs. We divide the 123 CASP10 targets into five groups according to their logM eff values:), which contain 19, 17, 25, 36 and 26 targets, respectively. Meanwhile, M eff is the number of non-redundant sequence homologs for the protein under consideration (see Section 2 for definition). Only medium-and long-range contacts are considered here.) and PSICOV , both of which require a large number of sequence homologs, we divide Set600 into two subsets based on the amount of homologous information available for the protein under prediction. The first subset is relatively easier, containing 471 proteins with M eff 4100 (see Section 2 for definition). All the proteins in this subset have4500 sequence homologs, which satisfies the requirement of PSICOV. The second subset is more challenging to predict, containing 130 proteins with M eff 100. As shown in, even on the first subset, PhyCMAP still exceeds PSICOV and Evfold, although the advantage over PSICOV is not substantial for C contacts prediction when short-range contacts are excluded from consideration. PhyCMAP also outperforms NNcon and CMAPpro on this set. As shown in, on the second subset, PhyCMAP significantly outperforms PSICOV and is slightly better than CMAPpro and NNcon. These results again confirm that our method applies to a protein without many sequence homologs, on which PSICOV and Evfold usually fail. It should be noticed that CMAPpro used Astral 1.73 as its training set, which shares 490 sequence identity with 226 proteins in Set600 (180 with M eff 4100 and 46 with M eff 100). To more fairly compare the prediction methods, we exclude the 226 proteins from Set600 that share 490 sequence identity with the CMAPpro training set. Here, the sequence identity is calculated using CD-HIT . This results in a set of 291 proteins with M eff 4100 and 84 proteins M eff 100.shows that PhyCMAP greatly outperforms CMAPpro and Evfold on the reduced dataset. PhyCMAP also outperforms. The relationship between prediction accuracy and the number of non-redundant sequence homologs (M eff ). x-axis is logM eff and y-axis is the mean accuracy of top L/10 predicted contacts on the corresponding CASP10 target group. Only medium-and long-range contacts are consideredNote: The C results are in gray rows. 
