Structural bioinformatics Predicting pseudoknotted structures across two RNA sequences Motivation: Laboratory RNA structure determination is demanding and costly and thus, computational structure prediction is an important task. Single sequence methods for RNA secondary structure prediction are limited by the accuracy of the underlying folding model, if a structure is supported by a family of evolutionarily related sequences, one can be more confident that the prediction is accurate. RNA pseu-doknots are functional elements, which have highly conserved structures. However, few comparative structure prediction methods can handle pseudoknots due to the computational complexity. Results: A comparative pseudoknot prediction method called DotKnot-PW is introduced based on structural comparison of secondary structure elements and H-type pseudoknot candidates. DotKnot-PW outperforms other methods from the literature on a hand-curated test set of RNA structures with experimental support. Availability: DotKnot-PW and the RNA structure test set are available at the web site http://dotknot.Macromolecules such as DNA, RNA and proteins have the ability to form diverse tertiary structures, which enable functionality and thus, life. For many decades, proteins were deemed the global players in the cell until RNA entered the spotlight. For example, RNA structures have been found to be catalytically active, which was assumed to be the privilege of proteins. Furthermore, small RNAs are known to regulate gene expression and RNA viruses employ a plethora of structure elements to invade the host cell. To gain insight into macromolecule function, one must investigate the structure. The first step in RNA folding is stable base pairing that leads to a secondary structure. As RNA structure formation is of hierarchical nature, secondary structure is the basis for the tertiary fold that produces the functional structure. Especially for RNAs, structure determination by experimental means is an intricate and expensive task. Computational RNA structure prediction is therefore an invaluable tool for biologists. Comparative structure prediction is considered the most reliable approach for computational RNA structure prediction. Single sequence structure prediction is always limited by the accuracy of the underlying folding model. Three main streams have been identified for comparative RNA secondary structure prediction:(i) predict a structure from a pre-computed sequence alignment; (ii) simultaneously compute an alignment and a structure and (iii) alignment-free methods . Tools for multiple sequence alignments such as ClustalW are readily available and thus, structure prediction from an alignment is a tempting approach [e.g. RNAalifold (. Such methods heavily depend on the sequence conservation and quality of the underlying alignment. However, ncRNAs are conserved rather on the structure level than on the sequence level. The gold standard of RNA comparative structure prediction is the Sankoff approach as it does not rely on a high-quality sequence alignment and captures the structural conservation of ncRNAs.introduced a theoretical dynamic programming algorithm for simultaneous folding and aligning for a set of N sequences that takes O(n 3N ) time and O(n 2N ) space. Practical variants have been derived which more or less retain the Sankoff principle by sacrificing optimality. Alignment-free methods aim to avoid the pragmatic restrictions made in a practical Sankoff approach as well as the reliance on a high-quality alignment [e.g. CARNAC (. Note that all of these comparative structure prediction methods exclude the prediction of RNA pseudoknots. RNA pseudoknots are crossing structure elements with diverse functions. The principle of pseudoknot formation is that bases within a loop region pair with complementary unpaired bases outside the loop. From an algorithmic point of view, even the simplest type of pseudoknot adds considerable computational demands due to crossing base pairs. In fact, the majority of comparative RNA structure prediction methods exclude pseudoknots. Biologists have delivered a wealth of studies, which show that pseudoknots have an astonishing number of diverse functions and occur in most classes of RNA . RNA viruses use pseudoknots for hijacking the replication apparatus of the host . A limited number of RNA comparative structure prediction methods can handle pseudoknots due to the computational complexity. Several of these methods take a sequence alignment as an input. ILM is an algorithm that takes as an input either individual sequences or a sequence alignment . A base pair score matrix is prepared initially and helices are added to the structure in an iterative fashion. In the approach hxmatch, a maximum weighted matching algorithm with combined thermodynamic and covariance scores is used . This program gives the option to be combined with RNAalifold. To whom correspondence should be addressed. The Author 2012. Published by Oxford University Press. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/), which permits unrestricted reuse, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.KNetFold is a machine learning method, which takes a sequence alignment as an input and outputs a consensus structure allowing pseudoknots . Simulfold takes an alignment as an input and simultaneously calculates a structure including pseudoknots, a multiple-sequence alignment and an evolutionary tree by sampling from the joint posterior distributions . Tfold combines stem stability, covariation and conservation to search for compatible stems and subsequently for pseudoknots for a set of aligned homologous sequences . Several comparative structure prediction methods including pseudoknots do not rely on an initial sequence alignment. The graph-theoretical approach comRNA computes stem similarity scores and uses a maximum clique finding algorithm to find pseudoknotted structures . SCARNA performs pairwise structural alignment of stem fragments with fixed lengths derived from the probability dot plot . In the following, a novel comparative approach for predicting structures including H-type pseudoknots called DotKnot-PW will be introduced. The input consists of two unaligned, evolutionarily related RNA sequences. Similarity scores between structure elements will be calculated. Statistically significant pairs will be used to find the set of conserved structure elements common to two sequences, which maximize a combined thermodynamic and similarity score. Using a hand-curated test set of pseudoknotted structures with experimental support, the prediction accuracy of DotKnot-PW will be compared with methods from the literature.Many pseudoknot prediction programs have been evaluated using all the entries in the PseudoBase database (van). There are several caveats in this approach. First, the sequences given in PseudoBase are those which exactly harbor the pseudoknot. However, in practice structure prediction algorithms will be applied to longer sequences without prior knowledge of the pseudoknot location. Second, long-range pseudoknot entries appear in a truncated version in the database. Third, some classes of pseudoknots have a large number of entries (such as short H-type pseudoknots in the 3 0-untranslated regions of plant viruses), whereas more complex types of pseudoknots only have one representative (such as long-range rRNA pseudoknots). Therefore, a hand-curated dataset of pseudoknot structures will be used here. When it comes to pseudoknots, many structures have been published based on a secondary structure predicted by free energy minimization. These predicted secondary structures are used as a working model and refined using experimental techniques such as chemical and enzymatic probing. However, the native structure remains unsolved unless tertiary structure determination methods such as X-ray crystallography are used. Testing structures that are based on computer predictions with no experimental support creates a bias in the benchmark and will be avoided in this evaluation. A total of 16 pseudoknotted reference structures from different RNA types were collected, which have strong experimental support. For each reference structure, a supporting set of 10 evolutionarily related sequences was obtained from the RFAM database . Note that for the vast majority of supporting sequences, no experimentally determined structures are available. The average pairwise sequence identities vary from 55 to 99. Given a reference structure, the performance of prediction algorithms is evaluated in terms of sensitivity (S), i.e. the percentage of base pairs in the reference structure, which are predicted correctly, as well as positive predictive value (PPV), i.e. the percentage of predicted pairs, which are in the reference structure. The Matthews correlation coefficient (MCC) is also reported and is in the range from 1 to 1, where 1 corresponds to a perfect prediction and 1 to a prediction that is in total disagreement with the reference structure. The performance of each method for predicting the reference structure was evaluated as described in Gardner and Giegerich (2004). DotKnot-PW was compared with methods that are freely available and use standard input and output formats. The comparative methods are CARNAC, Tfold and hxmatch (with theA option using RNAalifold). All of these methods return structure predictions for only the reference structure with regards to the support set of evolutionarily related sequences. Tfold and hxmatch take a sequence alignment as the input. ClustalW with the default parameters was used to produce the initial sequence alignment. DotKnot-PW and CARNAC take a set of unaligned sequences as the input. Furthermore, prediction results for the reference sequence (not the supporting sequences) were obtained from the single sequence methods DotKnot , ProbKnot , IPknot and RNAfold . Note that all methods except CARNAC and RNAfold allow pseudoknot prediction. The results are shown in. DotKnot-PW has the highest average MCC of 0.75 for the test sequences. For each reference structure with the 10 support sequences from the corresponding RFAM family, 10 predictions are returned ordered by the combined free energy and similarity score. If only thepairwise prediction with highest combined free energy and similarity score is taken, DotKnot-PW has an improved average MCC of 0.81. Tfold and hxmatch have average MCC of 0.6 and 0.59, respectively. CARNAC has average MCC of 0.45 with much higher average specificity than sensitivity. The prediction results for single sequence structure prediction for each of the reference sequences with experimentally determined structures are also shown in. Note that this does not include the prediction for the support sequences from RFAM, as no experimentally determined structures are available. All single sequence pseudoknot prediction methods show improved results over using RNAfold. DotKnot has the highest average MCC of 0.76, followed by IPKnot and ProbKnot. As an example, consider the S15 mRNA pseudoknot that binds to specific proteins in the autoregulation mechanism of ribosomal protein S15 synthesis . For the reference sequence S15 and 10 support sequences from the corresponding RFAM family, DotKnot-PW returns pairwise predictions ordered by the combined free energy and similarity score. The top two pairwise predictions with the highest scores are shown in.We presented DotKnot-PW for prediction of structures common to two RNA sequences, including H-type pseudoknots. Both DotKnot and DotKnot-PW have been designed as dedicated pseudoknot prediction tools. In the following, important aspects of pseudoknot prediction will be discussed. 
