Prediction of the permeability of neutral drugs inferred from their solvation properties Motivation: Determination of drug absorption is an important component of the drug discovery and development process in that it plays a key role in the decision to promote drug candidates to clinical trials. We have developed a method that, on the basis of an analysis of the dynamic distribution of water molecules around a compound obtained by molecular dynamics simulations, can compute a parameter-free value that correlates very well with the compound permeability measured using the human colon adenocarcinoma (Caco-2) cell line assay. Results: The method has been tested on twenty-three neutral drugs for which a consistent set of experimental data is available. We show here that our method reproduces the experimental data better than other existing tools. Furthermore it provides a detailed view of the relationship between the hydration and the permeability properties of molecules.The study of drug absorption is of critical importance in the development of effective drugs. The path of a drug from the site of administration to its target cells or compartments implies the crossing of several semipermeable cell membranes, therefore it is relevant to be able to predict whether and to which extent a molecule can pass through the cell membranes. Passive permeation of drugs through the biological cell membranes is obviously strongly dependent on the molecule physicochemical properties . It has been established that the acidbase character of the molecule (which influences the charge of the molecule at the specific pH), its lipophilicity (which affects its partition between aqueous and lipid environments) and solubility are the most relevant parameters to take into account. These parameters are well described by the molecule hydropathy profile . A more lipophilic drug is more likely to effectively cross the hydrophobic phospholipid bilayer. On the other hand, extremely hydrophobic molecules, insoluble in aqueous body fluids, might be poorly absorbed . In summary, there should be an appropriate balance between the hydrophobicity and hydrophilicity of a molecule . From an experimental point of view, data on permeability can be obtained by in situ and/or in vivo animal studies, but these are time consuming and expensive experiments and therefore only performed towards the end of the drug development process. Efforts have therefore focused on the development of in vitro permeability assays that can mimic the relevant characteristics of in vivo absorption. Among these, there are the Parallel Artificial Membrane Permeability Assay (PAMPA) , the human colon adenocarcinoma (Caco-2) cell line assay , the Madin-Darby Canine Kidney (MDCK) cell assay , the rat duodenal immortalized cell line assay (2/4A1 cell) , and the rat everted gut sac assay . All of them are routinely used for the preliminary assessment of drug permeability. In particular, the Caco-2 cell is V C The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press.In silico permeability prediction is consistent with available published data. We computed four indicators (I y , I n , I and I ) described in the Methods section for each of the drugs in our dataset. As explained in detail in the Methods section, these indices are derived from the conditional probability of finding a water molecule with a given orientation around the solute atoms estimated from the results of molecular dynamics simulations. In particular, the first two (I y and I n ) provide information about the hydrophilic and hydrophobic properties of the compound and are computed from the probability values of finding water molecules in the first and second hydration shells, respectively. I and I are related to the dipole orientation of the water molecules surrounding the analyzed compound and therefore to the effect of its positive and negative charges. The values of the indices for the analyzed molecules are reported in Supplementary Table S1. Three of these parameter-free indicators (I n , I and I ) correlate remarkably well with the permeability data while the I y index shows a lower level of correlation. We tested whether a combination of these indices can represent a good proxy for estimating the permeability of a molecule. To this end, we used a multiple linear regression algorithm as implemented in the R function lm to find the weights providing the best correlation with the Caco-2 experimental data. The tool also provides the probability P-value of a computed coefficient to be different from 0. We tested both linear and quadratic terms in the regression. The best correlation is obtained by a linear fit of the I n and I indices (P-value 0.001), while I y and I were found to contribute very little to the overall correlation (P-value 0.05). This is consistent with the values of their correlation coefficients (see). The regression model corresponding to the best fit is:where a 3.06 (P-value 4.7 10 7 ; b 0.04 (P-value 2.6 10 3 ) and c 3092 (P-value 4.0 10 7 ).Histograms of P(h hi jR and P h d jR) for Diazepam. In both histograms the cells highlighted in grey are used to calculate the sum of the conditional probability densities at each given angle and distance. In the P(hhi jR) histogram, the yellow arrows indicate the first and second component of the hydrophilic index related to the two peaks in the first hydration shell. The green arrows show the first and the second component of the hydrophobic peaks that are localized in the second hydration shell. In the P(h d jR) histogram, the blue arrow indicates the contribution of positive charge distribution. The pink arrow indicates the contribution of the negative charge distributionIn Table 1 we also report the correlation between each index and the Caco-2 permeability values. As aspect the highest linear correlation value is between I n index (hydrophobic index) and Caco-2 permeability value because a more lipophilic drug is more likely to effectively cross the hydrophobic phospholipid bilayer. More interesting is the correlation linked to positive charge distribution index I . It can be observed that the index with the highest value of negative correlation is I , indicating that most likely positive groups prevent uptake of compounds more than negative ones (see also Supplementary).reports the predicted Ppred permeability values obtaining using Eq. (1) for all the drugs considered and shows that they reproduce very well the experimental Caco-2 permeability values (Pearsons correlation coefficient, r 91). We also performed a cross validation analysis by repeatedly leaving out 20 of the compounds (testing sets) and re-computing the coefficients of Eq. (1) on the remaining ones (training sets) as described in the Methods section. We iterated this procedure 10 000 times, randomly choosing the training set at each step. The predicted average values (P pred_CV ) obtained for each drug in the test set are reported in. Once again, the correlation between prediction and experiment is very satisfactory (88) . The coefficients of Eq. (1) are also very stable. Their average value and standard deviation obtained in the 10 000 cross validation runs are: a 3.064 6 0.194, b 0.043 6 0.005 and c 3091.866 6 195.453. The average difference between the predicted and experimental values is 4.7 10 6 cm/s. It is relevant to mention here that the threshold used to discriminate between low absorbance and high absorbance compounds is usually set to 8.0 10 6 cm/s and the data shown indemonstrate that only in two cases (Acyclovir and Zidovudine) our method would significantly misclassify the compound. In summary, Eq. (1) describes well the permeability properties of neutral compounds. It is worth noticing that the P pred value is well balanced in the sense that it overestimates and underestimates the experimental values in a similar number of cases (11 and 12 respectively). We compared our results with those of several other methods (as described in the Methods section) and the results are reported inand Supplementarye. It can be appreciated that the correlation between predicted and experimental values is higher for our method. The average error is lower than all other tested methods, but for the Gua_2 method that shows a very similar value.Also the correlation value between each index and Caco-2 experimental value is reported.The first column reports the drug name, the second reports the experimental values, the third (Ppred) the values obtained using Eq. (1). The last column reports the predicted values obtained in the cross validation test (P pred_CV ). We have shown here that an approach based on the simultaneous analysis of molecule hydrophobicity and charge distribution has the potential to accurately predict the passive plasma membrane permeability of neutral drugs. This method may be useful for investigating the mechanism of passive permeation of small neutral compounds since it can easily provide information on the role that every single atom plays on the hydration process. Our P pred indicator correlates very well with the experimentally determined Caco-2 permeability values and performs better than other available methods. Furthermore, it only requires the knowledge of the chemical structure of the compound. Given the cost and impact of late stage failures in drug development we believe that the relatively high computational cost of running the molecular dynamics simulations (an average of 48 hours on a 20 CPU server for each molecule) is not necessarily a relevant drawback of the approach. As is the case also for several in vitro methods, our method cannot estimate the permeability of drugs that use an active uptake system. In these cases, additional techniques, such as docking the compounds to efflux/influx protein models, should be explored.The goodness of fit parameters (r and R 2 ) are also shown. 
