Prediction of therapeutic microRNA based on the human metabolic network Motivation: MicroRNA (miRNA) expression has been found to be deregulated in human cancer, contributing, in part, to the interest of the research community in using miRNAs as alternative therapeutic targets. Although miRNAs could be potential targets, identifying which miRNAs to target for a particular type of cancer has been difficult due to the limited knowledge on their regulatory roles in cancer. We address this challenge by integrating miRNA-target prediction, metabolic modeling and context-specific gene expression data to predict therapeutic miRNAs that could reduce the growth of cancer. Results: We developed a novel approach to simulate a condition-specific metabolic system for human hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) wherein overexpression of each miRNA was simulated to predict their ability to reduce cancer cell growth. Our approach achieved 480 accuracy in predicting the miRNAs that could suppress metas-tasis and progression of liver cancer based on various experimental evidences in the literature. This condition-specific metabolic system provides a framework to explore the mechanisms by which miRNAs modulate metabolic functions to affect cancer growth. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first computational approach implemented to predict therapeutic miRNAs for human cancer based on their functional role in cancer metabolism. Analyzing the metabolic functions altered by the miRNA-identified metabolic genes essential for cell growth and proliferation that are targeted by the miRNAs. Availability and implementation: See supplementary protocols andMicroRNA (miRNA) expression has been found to be deregulated in human cancer . Some of the first miRNAs identified to be involved in cancer were miR-15 and miR-16, which were found downregulated in most lymphocytic leukemia patients . Others include oncogenic miR-17-92, which promotes c-Myc-induced tumorigenesis in mice , and a tumor suppressor miRNA let-7, which inhibits expression of the oncogene RAS in lung cancer cell lines . Further, a global decrease in miRNA levels was observed in human cancers . Knockout of the miRNA processing enzymes, Drosha and Dicer, enhances cancer cell growth in vitro and their invasiveness in mice , confirming that widespread reduction in miRNA expression could promote tumorigenesis. Therefore, miRNAs could have intrinsic functions in tumor suppression and be potential therapeutic targets. Synthetic miRNAs can be introduced into mammalian systems , as was shown in a pioneering study on therapeutic miRNA delivery of miR-26 s in a HCC mice model that successfully inhibited tumor cell proliferation and induced cancer-specific apoptosis . Although miRNAs could be potential alternative targets for cancer treatment, it has been difficult to identify which miRNAs to target for a particular type of cancer, as the underlying mechanisms of how miRNAs are involved in cancer are largely unknown. Experimental evidences of how miRNAs regulate their targets in cancer cells have been limited. The expression of individual targets, such as RAS and E2F1 (O), has been shown to be regulated by miRNAs and thereby used to explain the association of miRNAs with cancer. However, each miRNA could regulate many target genes, and the same miRNA could have oncogenic or anti-tumorgenic activity depending on the context or cell type in which the targets are expressed. Current computational studies focus primarily on analyzing miRNA expression profiles to identify miRNAs that are differentially expressed or signatures that can separate a particular cancer type from normal samples . More advanced data mining approaches integrate miRNA, gene expression data and putative miRNAgene interactions to identify regulatory modules in which the miRNA expression is found to be negatively correlated with putative targets in the cancer samples . Nevertheless, it remains unclear whether the altered miRNA expressions are the cause or consequence of the carcinogenesis processes, and which miRNAs could be good targets for treatment. Furthermore, as an miRNA could simultaneously target many genes, it has been difficult with current approaches to systematically predict the effect on perturbation of an miRNA. In this study, we propose an alternative approach to tackle this problem and integrate putative miRNAtarget-gene interactions, metabolic modeling and context-specific gene expression data. Our analysis focuses on the human metabolic system, as abnormal metabolic functions are known to be involved in supporting tumor growth and proliferation . To whom correspondence should be addressed. For example, most cancer cells have higher glycolytic rates, which is called Warburg effect . A recent study on breast cancer further uncovered alterations in glucose metabolism mediated by the phosphoglycerate dehydrogenase enzyme , whose expression was found to be associated with poor prognosis . Because metabolism plays an essential role in cell growth and proliferation, genes regulating metabolism have been used as drug targets in the treatment of cancer . We hypothesize that miRNAs could be implicated in the metabolic regulation of cancer, and study the targets of miRNAs in the context of the human metabolic network for which detailed mechanistic information is available for systems modeling. Our approach takes advantage of current knowledge of the human metabolic network to reconstruct a context-specific metabolic system for human liver cancer (HCC). The model is used to predict miRNAs whose overexpression or delivery could inhibit cancer cell growth by downregulating its target metabolic genes. By explicitly modeling the cancer phenotype as a specific metabolic state, we are able to predict not only the miRNAs involved or altered in cancer but also the potential miRNA targets that could change the cancer metabolic phenotype if perturbed. These targets could be candidates in the treatment of the disease. This is in contrast to previous studies of miRNA in cancer where the cancer phenotype is used as a label/annotation of samples against another label of normal . Our approach provides a computational platform to integrate knowledge from different sources, to study in silico the global effect of miRNA perturbations on the metabolic network and to generate hypotheses that could provide insights into the mechanisms underlying the regulation of miRNAs on cancer metabolism.In this study, we reconstruct a human context-dependent metabolic network to associate gene expression changes with constraints on the reactions. Based on a reference metabolic network [e.g. the generic human metabolic network (and the context information obtained from gene expression data of a particular phenotype of interest, our approach estimates the activity change of each reaction and adjusts the upper bounds (i.e. the maximum capacity) of the reaction, to provide a new metabolic network model that is specific to the condition. The process is shown in, and the algorithm is described in Section 2. Information on the human liver-specific gene expression is obtained from a curated dataset in the literature . Our approach is applied to reconstruct a liver cancerspecific metabolic model from the human generic metabolic network by setting the maximum capacity of the reactions based on context information obtained from gene expression data of cancer samples. The liver-specific metabolic network is used to predict the growth and proliferation rate of cancer cells with FBA (Section 2). Because cancer cells modulate metabolic functions to help support their rapid growth and proliferation, biomass production was used as the objective function to reflect the growth and proliferation rate of the cancer cells. The rate of biomass production is based on experimentally measured compositions of DNA, RNA, amino acids and lipids in cancer cells and reflects the maximum rate of cell growth and proliferation that can be achieved. To estimate the robustness of the network reconstruction against potential noise from gene expression data, we applied FVA on the reconstructed liver model. FVA performs a sensitivity analysis of the fluxes with respect to changes in reaction bounds that are determined by the gene expression data. The results of FVA show that a 25 reduction of the upper bound in all the reactions that carry fluxes would only reduce the output of the model by no more than 10 (i.e. retain 90 of the biomass production). On average, the bounds need to be changed 83 for any reaction that carry fluxes to be able to change biomass production by 10. Nevertheless in our reconstruction, for a reaction to have a 25 reduction in the bounds requires all the genes in a particular enzyme complex that catalyze the reaction to have 42-fold downregulation in expression. Therefore, the FVA results suggest a robust system that is insensitive to potential noise in the microarray data. 
