PRIMUS: improving pedigree reconstruction using mitochondrial and Y haplotypes PRIMUS is a pedigree reconstruction algorithm that uses estimates of genome-wide identity by descent to reconstruct pedigrees consistent with observed genetic data. However, when genetic data for individuals within a pedigree are missing, often multiple pedigrees can be reconstructed that fit the data. We report a major expansion of PRIMUS that uses mitochondrial (mtDNA) and non-recombining Y chromosome (NRY) haplotypes to eliminate many pedigree structures that are inconsistent with the genetic data. We demonstrate that discordances in mtDNA and NRY haplotypes substantially reduce the number of potential pedigrees, and often lead to the identification of the correct pedigree. Availability and Implementation: We have implemented PRIMUS updates in PERL and it is available at primus.Correctly determining pedigree structures is key to identifying the causes of genetic disorders . In some cases, reported pedigree structures are inconsistent with observed genetic sharing , which may result in a loss of power and failure to find the disease causing variant(s) . Cryptic relatedness within datasets and sample swaps are frequently observed. Pedigree reconstruction can find cryptic relationships and correctly fit them into a pedigree structure . Early methods for checking pedigrees applied pairwise relationship prediction approaches that use co-dominant genetic markers ; however, pedigree reconstruction can more accurately predict relationships, find the correct pedigree, and identify cryptic pedigrees . Pedigree Reconstruction and Identification of a Maximum Unrelated Set (PRIMUS;) uses estimates of genome-wide identity by descent (IBD) to reconstruct pedigree structures that fit the IBD estimates. Missing genetic data for a set of people in a family often leads to the identification of multiple pedigrees that fit the data. We show that by using inconsistencies in the inheritance patterns of the human mitochondria (mtDNA) and non-recombining Y chromosome (NRY) haplotypes captured by genotyping arrays or by highthroughput sequencing , improves the accuracy of pedigree reconstruction. We describe the utilization of mtDNA and NRY data for pedigree reconstruction in PRIMUS (v1.8.0) to reduce the number of generated pedigrees and improve the chance of identifying the correct pedigree structure. V C The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.comPRIMUS is the current state-of-the-art program for reconstructing pedigrees and is the only program that lists all non-inbred pedigree structures that fit genetic data using up to 3rd degree relationships. To illustrate the use of mtDNA and NRY haplotypes during pedigree reconstruction, we compare reconstructions by PRIMUS with and without mtDNA and NRY haplotypes with simulated and real data. We modified the pedigree simulations described by, to explore the effects of using mtDNA and NRY on the reconstruction of pedigrees with different structures, genotypes and combinations of missing samples. We selected pedigrees of size 20 and masked the genotypes for 050 of individuals in the pedigree. We modified the simulations by permuting the sex of the individuals, while maintaining the biologic integrity of the pedigree. For each simulation, we assigned a unique NRY haplotype to each male founder and a unique mtDNA haplotype to all founders and propagated these genotypes through the pedigree. We obtained mtDNA and NRY haplotypes from the phase 1 release of unrelated CEU and TSI haplotypes with individual-level call rates 90 from the 1000 Genomes Project . These haplotypes consisted of 2832 mtDNA and 8665 NRY loci with quality score 30, call rates 95, and with a minor allele frequency 1 for inclusion. We randomly assigned a unique haplotype to each of the founders in each pedigree and propagated the haplotypes through the pedigrees. We considered pedigree reconstruction performance on the autosomal data alone as the baseline and compared this to the performance when we added additional information such as sex status, mtDNA, and NRY. We see a moderate reduction in the number of possible pedigrees with mtDNA and NRY individually, but the synergistic effects of mtDNA and NRY with sex status exceeded the combined individual improvements . Our results show themtDNA, NRY, sex or all of these are applied. The addition of either mtDNA or NRY data outperforms the addition of only sex status. The greatest reduction in the number of possible pedigrees is obtained when mtDNA, NRY and sex status are combined, eliminating nearly 40 of the incorrect pedigrees PRIMUSlargest improvement in pedigrees with more missing samples (35 40), where a 37 reduction in the mean number of genetically consistent pedigrees is seen . The improvement declines beyond 40 missing samples because the pedigrees become too sparse for the discordant mtDNA and NRY haplotypes to rule out possible pedigrees. We also see a substantial improvement in ranking the correct pedigree structure (Supplemental). In fact, when mtDNA and NRY are combined with individual sex status, we see a 4.5-fold increase over sex status alone in the number of simulations that reconstructed to the only true pedigree. The improvements in pedigree specificity using mtDNA and NRY genotypes are remarkable. As shown in Supplemental, a pedigree that reconstructed to 58 possible pedigrees using autosomal DNA and sex status, resolved to the single correct pedigree with the addition of mtDNA data. The new implementation of PRIMUS identified this pedigree by eliminating the 57 pedigrees that were inconsistent with the mtDNA data. We validated our results on real data by reconstructing the pedigrees within the Jackson Heart Study (JHS) cohort. We received Illumina Infinium HumanExome BeadChip genotype data for 2790 individuals. We estimated IBD proportions for these individuals using the method described in. After cleaning (Supplemental Methods), there were 23 500 autosomal SNPs used for the IBD calculation, and 126 NRY SNPs and 172 mtDNA SNPs used for haplotype comparison. Using PRIMUS, we reconstructed the JHS pedigrees with and without mtDNA/NRY haplotype data. Inclusion of the mtDNA/NRY haplotypes reduced the number of pedigrees generated for the JHS family networks. We saw up to a 67 reduction in the number of generated pedigrees (Supplemental), with an average reduction of 18. This improvement of specificity did not negatively impact sensitivity; PRIMUS with mtDNA and NRY identified the expected pedigrees at the same rate as PRIMUS without mtDNA and NRY. These results fall well within the range of improvement we saw in simulations with 1000 Genomes data. Therefore, with both simulated and real data, NRY and mtDNA provide a substantial improvement in automated pedigree reconstruction. 
