Structural bioinformatics ProBiS algorithm for detection of structurally similar protein binding sites by local structural alignment Motivation: Exploitation of locally similar 3D patterns of physico-chemical properties on the surface of a protein for detection of binding sites that may lack sequence and global structural conservation. Results: An algorithm, ProBiS is described that detects structurally similar sites on protein surfaces by local surface structure alignment. It compares the query protein to members of a database of protein 3D structures and detects with sub-residue precision, structurally similar sites as patterns of physicochemical properties on the protein surface. Using an efficient maximum clique algorithm, the program identifies proteins that share local structural similarities with the query protein and generates structure-based alignments of these proteins with the query. Structural similarity scores are calculated for the query proteins surface residues, and are expressed as different colors on the query protein surface. The algorithm has been used successfully for the detection of proteinprotein, proteinsmall ligand and protein DNA binding sites. Availability: The software is available, as a web tool, free of charge for academic users at http://probis.In the Protein Data Bank (PDB), there are presently 8000 protein structures derived from structural genomic studies and 2000 of these have no known function . Binding sites are closely related to protein function, the identification of binding sites in proteins is essential to an understanding of their interactions with ligands, including other proteins. Many computational tools for the analysis and prediction of binding sites have been reported. Binding sites can retain conservation of sequence and structure . Structural conservation however is more prevalent . Even in the absence of obvious sequence similarity, structural similarity between two protein structures can imply common ancestry, which in turn can suggest a similar function (i.e. a binding site). However, it is also possible for structurally similar proteins to have different To whom correspondence should be addressed. functions, and similar folding by itself does not necessarily imply evolutionary divergence . In the case of divergent evolution, similarity is due to the common origin, such as accumulation of differences from homologous ancestral protein structures. In contrast, convergent evolution arises as a result of some sort of ecological or physical drivers toward a similar solution, even though the structure has arisen independently. A rough estimate is that the frequency of two different folds converging to a similar statistically significant side-chain pattern is 1 . It has been shown that convergent evolution of enzyme binding sites is not a rare phenomenon . If a protein has no known function, but a known 3D structure, inferences concerning function can be made by comparison to other proteins. Recently, a number of web servers for local structural alignment have become available. These provide comparison of pre-selected parts of proteins (e.g. binding sites, user-defined structural motifs) against binding sites or whole-protein structural databases. The MultiBind and MAPPIS servers allow the identification of common spatial arrangements of physicochemical properties such as H-bond donor, acceptor, aliphatic, aromatic or hydrophobic in a set of user provided protein binding sites defined by interactions with small molecules (MultiBind) or in a set of user-provided proteinprotein interfaces (MAPPIS). Others provide comparison of entire protein structures against a number of user submitted structures. Unlike global alignment approaches, local structural alignment approaches are suited to detection of locally conserved patterns of functional groups, which often appear in binding sites and have significant involvement in ligand binding . In this article, we describe an algorithm ProBiS, which, in contrast to these methods, enables local structural alignment of entire protein surface structure against a large database of protein structures in reasonable time. It detects structurally similar regions in a query protein by mapping structural similarity scores on its surface. The comparison involves geometry and physicochemical properties, and is conducted at the level of amino acid functional groups. For each pairwise comparison of the query protein to a database protein, the algorithm produces multiple local alignments of the surface regions that are found in both; no attempt is made to align the proteins globally and similar folding is not a requirement for a relationship between the two proteins. Since no presumptions about localization of binding sites prior to comparison are used, ProBiS may detect new binding sites and suggest ligands that these binding sites may accommodate.Page: 1161 11601168ProBiS detects structurally similar regions and maps them on the surface of the appropriate protein structures. This is accomplished through the detection of high quality local structural alignments in a database of non-redundant protein structures. The programs performance in detecting different types of binding sites, e.g. proteinsmall ligand, proteinprotein, proteinDNA, has been studied on a set of 39 protein structures, details of which are provided in Supplementary Material. The local structural similarity scores generated by ProBiS are effective predictors of protein binding sites. The predictions, based solely on local structural similarity, are more accurate than those produced by ConSurf , a protein surface mapping tool which depends upon sequence conservation and which to our knowledge, is the only available tool that maps sequence conservation to protein structure. ProBiS is also compared with Q-SiteFinder , a method which detects energetic features in protein structures favorable for ligand binding and has been benchmarked as a small-ligand as well as protein protein binding sites detection tool . A detailed discussion of the results obtained by ProBiS is provided in the case of biotin carboxylase and in the case of TATA-binding protein (TBP); the unique ability of ProBiS to detect and align similar binding sites in protein structures with different folds and to compare it with other global and local structural alignment methods is described. All experiments described here were performed on a 16 threaded, 8 core, 2 processor personal computer. On this computer, pairwise local alignment of two protein structures with ProBiS requires typically 1 s and running ProBiS jobs in parallel, the nr-PDB search with a query protein of 200 residues, involving fast filtering followed by structural similarity mapping takes 10 min.It is well known that protein binding sites are structurally similar and many methods exist that can structurally align proteins. We introduce a new approach for the detection of binding sites in a 3D protein structure by searching for the locally similar surface structures in a large database of protein structures. The maximum clique technique, the core of the algorithm detects 3D correspondences between proteins at a sub-residue level. Local structural similarity scores are calculated and mapped to the query protein surface. Such prediction of binding sites which depends on structural similarity of protein surfaces is useful and accurate and can enjoy success in structures with dissimilar folding patterns. Structural similarity can provide additional advantages over sequence conservation in the detection of functional regions such as binding sites and it is concluded that structural comparison should be the method of choice when a crystallographic or NMR structure for a protein of interest is available. The ProBiS algorithm for detection of structurally similar binding sites in proteins is freely available as a web-tool. Detailed explanation and instructions to users of ProBiS can be found at http:// probis.cmm.ki.si. 
