Gene expression ProfileChaser: searching microarray repositories based on genome-wide patterns of differential expression We introduce ProfileChaser, a web server that allows for querying the Gene Expression Omnibus based on genome-wide patterns of differential expression. Using a novel, content-based approach, ProfileChaser retrieves expression profiles that match the differentially regulated transcriptional programs in a user-supplied experiment. This analysis identifies statistical links to similar expression experiments from the vast array of publicly available data on diseases, drugs, phenotypes and other experimental conditions.The introduction of the DNA microarray and other genome-level technologies has provided an unprecedented, systems-level view of cellular transcription. This detailed characterization of gene expression provides a unique opportunity for data-driven discovery of connections between biological conditions and phenotypes. Past work has demonstrated the utility of gene expression-based discovery in predicting the mechanisms of genetic and chemical perturbations and linking drugs and diseases , even when integrating data across different platforms and cell types . While these studies have demonstrated the power of gene expression-based approaches to biological hypothesis generation, few tools exist to exploit the primary molecular data cataloged in repositories such as the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) . Here we introduce ProfileChaser, a web server that allows for content-based gene expression search with a user-supplied experiment. Our tool mines GEO DataSets for experiments that differentially regulate the same transcriptional programs. ProfileChaser provides an accessible and powerful interface for leveraging public data to inform new To whom correspondence should be addressed. experiments and predict novel associations between diseases, drugs, genotypes and phenotypes.To illustrate the utility of our method, we queried ProfileChaser to find experiments that resemble the treatment of MCF7 breast cancer cells with 17-estradiol, the natural ligand of estrogen receptor (GDS3315). The top matching comparisons included several variations of this experiment performed by separate groups (, Supplementary). In addition, ProfileChaser identified other experimental contexts involving hormone-induced proliferation, including cytotoxic T cell response to interleukin-2 (GDS3222) and primary prostate response to testosterone treatment (GDS2562). An examination of significant genes confirmed that proliferation linked these biological conditions: in the comparison of GDS3315 with GDS2562, for instance, the second most significant gene encoded Ki-67, the canonical proliferation marker (Supplementary). Next, we used the comparison of tumorigenic and nontumorigenic breast cancer cells (GDS2618) to identify compounds that might specifically target these cell subpopulations (Supplementary). The comparison of dasatinib-resistant versus dasatinib-sensitive prostate cancer cell lines scored significantly, suggesting that tumorigenic breast cancer cells might be sensitive to this Src inhibitor. Treating basal breast cancer cell lines with dasatinib significantly decreases the proportion of ALDH1-positive tumorigenic cells, supporting this hypothesis . Finally, we recently used these methods to search GEO for datasets that resembled the comparison of neural stem cells from wild-type and FoxO3 / mice . We identified four matching profiles that linked FoxO3 to hypoxia, a relationship validated by recent experimental work with our collaborators . Thus, experiments retrieved by ProfileChaser provide statistical evidence for associations that may be verified by further experimental or computational analyses. ProfileChaser comparisons are defined by GEO annotations, and thus interpretation of results may not be straightforward. In particular, experimental designs with multiple factors may confound analysis (Supplementary). Subset names assigned by GEO may also be misleading. To properly interpret results, users should examine the design of each experiment using the GEO web interface and references therein. ProfileChaser cannot take advantage of potential paired-sample information, and DE profiles generated from the same experiment are not independent, since they contain overlapping samples. Finally, users should note that the absence of a positive result does not imply that two conditions are unrelated. The ability to query GEO based on differential expression will allow for the identification of new associations between diseases, drugs, genotypes and phenotypes. Future work will expand ProfileChaser to incorporate other sources of gene expression data, including European Bioinformatics Institute ArrayExpress . 
