Genome analysis Prokka: rapid prokaryotic genome annotation The multiplex capability and high yield of current day DNA-sequencing instruments has made bacterial whole genome sequen-cing a routine affair. The subsequent de novo assembly of reads into contigs has been well addressed. The final step of annotating all relevant genomic features on those contigs can be achieved slowly using existing web-and email-based systems, but these are not applicable for sensitive data or integrating into computational pipelines. Here we introduce Prokka, a command line software tool to fully annotate a draft bacterial genome in about 10 min on a typical desktop computer. It produces standards-compliant output files for further analysis or viewing in genome browsers. Availability and implementation: Prokka is implemented in Perl and is freely available under an open source GPLv2 license from http://Genome annotation is the process of identifying and labeling all the relevant features on a genome sequence . At minimum, this should include coordinates of predicted coding regions and their putative products, but it is desirable to go beyond this to non-coding RNAs, signal peptides and so on. There are various online annotation servers . The NCBI provides a Prokaryotic Genomes Automatic Annotation Pipeline service via email, with a turn-around time measured in days. RAST is a web server for annotating bacterial and archaeal genomes that provides annotation results in under a day , and xBASE2 does similar in a few hours . These classes of tools are valuable, but they are not useful where throughput or privacy is critical. Here we present Prokka, a command line software tool that can be installed on any Unix system. Prokka coordinates a suite of existing software tools to achieve a rich and reliable annotation of genomic bacterial sequences. Where possible, it will exploit multiple processing cores, and a typical bacterial genome can be annotated in $10 min on a quad core desktop computer. It is well suited to iterative models of sequence analysis and integration into genomic software pipelines.Prokka was designed to be both accurate and fast. To assess accuracy, we compared the annotations of Prokka, RAST and xBase2 for the highly curated Escherichia coli K-12 genome. All methods were told it was an E.coli genome.shows that Prokka produced an overall better annotation than both RAST and xBase2. This result could vary for less well-studied or draft genomes. Prokka uses parallel processing to decrease running time on multicore computers. The most time-consuming steps are BLAST and hmmscan, which both support multiple CPUs natively. However, Prokka is more efficient if it runs multiple single CPU threads on subsets of the data, which it achieves using GNU parallel . Experiments on our 64-core AMD Opteron server on single genomes show linear speedup with up to eight cores and sublinear gain thereafter. However, for much larger bacterial meta-genome datasets, linear speedup is observed for many more CPUs. To annotate the E.coli K-12 genome on a typical quad-core desktop computer takes about 6 min.The bold denotes the best performing tool (column) for that attribute (row). The italics are subsets of the Total CDS section.) Ribosomal RNA genes (rRNA) Aragorn Transfer RNA genes SignalP Signal leader peptides Infernal Non-coding RNA 
