BIOINFORMATICS DISCOVERY NOTE Genome analysis Promoter-proximal CCCTC-factor binding is associated with an increase in the transcriptional pausing index Motivation: It has been known for more than 2 decades that after RNA polymerase II (RNAPII) initiates transcription, it can enter into a paused or stalled state immediately downstream of the transcription start site before productive elongation. Recent advances in high-throughput genomic technologies facilitated the discovery that RNAPII pausing at promoters is a widespread physiologically regulated phenomenon. The molecular underpinnings of pausing are incompletely understood. The CCCTC-factor (CTCF) is a ubiquitous nuclear factor that has diverse regulatory functions, including a recently discovered role in promoting RNAPII pausing at splice sites. Results: In this study, we analyzed CTCF binding sites and nascent transcriptomic data from three different cell types, and found that promoter-proximal CTCF binding is significantly associated with RNAPII pausing.Promoter-proximal pausing of RNA polymerase II (RNAPII) has emerged as a widespread and important step in the regulation of transcription . The role of pausing is not completely understood, but initial evidence suggests that it allows for precise and rapid transcriptional response to stimuli such as developmental cues or cellular stressors . The underlying mechanisms of RNAPII pausing are thought to be complex . Recent publications have reported a few key factors that regulate polymerase pause site entry and release, including GAGA , c-MYC , ELL and XRN2 ; however, it is not clear whether and how many other complexes are also involved. As such, this area merits further investigation. The CCCTC-factor (CTCF) is a multifaceted gene regulator, with demonstrated roles in transcriptional activation/repression, insulation, imprinting and chromatin remodeling . In 2011, Shukla et al. published a seminal article, which reported for the first time that CTCF can facilitate exon inclusion by promoting RNAPII pausing at splice sites . Another recent study postulated that CTCF may regulate vascular endothelial growth factor transcription in part by mediating RNAPII pausing . Given these reports, and recent observations that at least 2025 of CTCF-binding events are proximal to promoters , we hypothesized that CTCF binding may be a cofactor in mediating promoterproximal RNAPII pausing. To investigate this possibility, we analyzed genome-wide nascent RNA data (global nuclear run-on followed by sequencing; GRO-seq) and empirically determined CTCF-binding sites from the only three cell types for which both datasets are publicly available: human cell lines IMR90 (lung fibroblast) and MCF-7 (breast cancer) and mouse embryonic stem cells (mES).For each cell type, we divided promoters according to whether CTCF was bound upstream/downstream of the TSS (Section 2). The number of promoter-proximal CTCF-binding sites was highly variable across cell types (Supplementary Material 1). GRO-seq data provide a density map of transcriptionally engaged RNAPII across the genome by purifying, sequencing and mapping nascent RNAs . Using recently published GRO-seq data, we calculated RNAPII pausing indices at RefSeq-annotated promoters in three different cell types, and assessed whether promoter-proximal CTCF binding is associated with elevated RNAPII pausing indices (Section 2). We made two novel observations: (1) Genes that exhibit promoter-proximal CTCF binding (defined as within 100 nt downstream of the TSS) have a significantly greater RNAPII pausing index than genes that do not (Supplementary Material 1). For example, in IMR90 cells, the median pausing index at promoters with proximal CTCF-binding sites is $2-fold greater (permutation test P 5 0.0001, Mann WhitneyWilcoxon test P 1.8 10 38) than at promoters without proximal CTCF-binding sites . The highly overlapping range of pausing indices between the two categories of promoters indicates that while CTCF binding may be associated with pausing, it is by no means necessary or sufficient. Regions of CTCF binding are enriched for motifs with elevated cytosine (C) content . As such, the observed association between CTCF-binding events and increased pausing index could be explained by nucleotide composition (i.e. cytosine enriched regions may be responsible for the association with pausing, independent of CTCF binding). To test this, we repeated the analysis in each cell type with computationally predicted CTCF-binding sites (Section 2), based on the known C-rich motif . We did not observe any association with pausing (; Supplementary Material 1), which strongly suggests that sequence composition alone is not sufficient to explain the association signal, but rather, the physical binding of CTCF is required.The association between CTCF binding and the promoterproximal pausing index is position-dependentthat is, the further upstream/downstream from the TSS CTCF is bound, the less of an association there is with RNAPII pausing (;. The association between CTCF binding and pausing index is shown. Each IMR90 promoter was classified based on the presence (Yes) or absence (No) of an empirically determined (IMR90 ChIPchip), or computationally predicted CTCF-binding site in the first 100 nt downstream of its TSS (x-axis). The pausing index at each promoter was calculated (Section 2) and transformed using the formula log 10 (pausing index 1) for visualization purposes (y-axis). The boxes in the plot cover percentiles 2575, and the bar within each box represents the median. The whiskers extend to the most extreme data point that is no more than 1.5 times the interquartile range from the box. Mann WhitneyWilcoxon non-parametric test P-values are indicated for the relevant comparisons. The position-specific effect on the association of CTCF binding with promoter-proximal RNAPII pausing is shown. The x-axis represents the distance (nt) from the TSS (vertical dashed line) of annotated (RefSeq) genes longer than 3 kb. The y-axis depicts a normalized difference in median pausing index between promoters with a CTCF-binding event (ChIP-seq/ChIP-chip peak) and promoters without a CTCFbinding event (no ChIP-seq/ChIP-chip peak). As such, the value 0.0 (horizontal dashed line) represents no difference in median pausing index between the two groups, a positive value represents increased pausing in promoters with a CTCF-binding event and a negative value represents decreased pausing in promoters with a CTCF-binding event. Results are shown for three cell lines (two human: IMR90, MCF-7; one mouse: mES cells) Supplementary Material 1). For example, in mES cells, CTCF binding within 101200 nt downstream of TSSs is highly significantly associated with pausing (permutation test P50.0001); however, this association is dramatically weakened for CTCF binding within 10012000 nt upstream/downstream of TSSs (permutation test P40.5).A recent study identified a novel role for CTCF in polymerase pausing at splice sites to facilitate exon inclusion . Our findings provide the first indication that CTCF is associated with promoter-proximal pausing. It is important to note that the study does not demonstrate that CTCF binding is necessary or sufficient for promoter-proximal pausing. Substantial additional experimental work is required to uncover the molecular underpinnings of the observed association between CTCF binding and RNAPII dynamics. The greatest degree of association with pausing is observed for CTCF-binding sites that are immediately downstream of the TSS. Therefore, an appealing mechanism for the observed association is steric hindrancethat is, stably bound CTCF may serve to hinder RNAPII processivity. If this is the case, it is likely that many other transcription factors with binding sites immediately downstream of TSSs also associate with RNAPII pausing. It will be possible to test this hypothesis as more transcription factor (TF) ChIP-seq and GRO-seq data are generated from the same cell type. We note, however, that because even sites that are upstream of the TSS are somewhat associated with pausing, steric hindrance is not likely to be the only mechanism involved. 
