ProQ2: estimation of model accuracy implemented in Rosetta Motivation: Model quality assessment programs are used to predict the quality of modeled protein structures. They can be divided into two groups depending on the information they are using: ensemble methods using consensus of many alternative models and methods only using a single model to do its prediction. The consensus methods excel in achieving high correlations between prediction and true quality measures. However, they frequently fail to pick out the best possible model, nor can they be used to generate and score new structures. Single-model methods on the other hand do not have these inherent shortcomings and can be used both to sample new structures and to improve existing consensus methods. Results: Here, we present an implementation of the ProQ2 program to estimate both local and global model accuracy as part of the Rosetta modeling suite. The current implementation does not only make it possible to run large batch runs locally, but it also opens up a whole new arena for conformational sampling using machine learned scoring functions and to incorporate model accuracy estimation in to various existing modeling schemes. ProQ2 participated in CASP11 and results from CASP11 are used to benchmark the current implementation. Based on results from CASP11 and CAMEO-QE, a continuous benchmark of quality estimation methods, it is clear that ProQ2 is the single-model method that performs best in both local and global model accuracy. Availability and implementation: https://github.com/bjornwallner/ProQ_scriptsProtein structure modeling represents a fundamental challenge in structural bioinformatics and is crucial for a detailed understanding of the biological function of molecules. It can be used to guide and explain experiments, as well as for prediction of proteins whose structure for the most part is unknown (105k known structures vs. 50 000k known sequences). A common technique in structure modeling is to generate many alternative models and then use a program to estimate the model accuracy to select the best model. Alternatively, the estimated accuracy can also be used to assess the absolute quality of a single model, i.e. a measure that is related to similarity to true native structure . ProQ2 is a single-model method that estimates model accuracy using a support vector machine (SVM) to predict the quality of a protein model by combining structural and sequence based features calculated from the model. The structural based features are contacts between 13 different atom types, residue-residue contacts grouping amino acids into six different groups (hydrophobic, positively charged, etc.) and surface accessibility using the same residue groups. The sequence-based features are calculated from information predicted from sequence, i.e. secondary structure, surface V C The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press.The ProQ2 version implemented in Rosetta participated in CASP11 with two methods, ProQ2 and ProQ2-refine. ProQ2 is only using the ProQ2 score, while ProQ2-refine does 10 side-chain repacks to calculate the optimal ProQ2 score given the current backbone. This has previously been shown to improve model selection by finding good backbones with sub-optimal side-chain packing . Based on the official CASP11 assessment and fromit is clear that both ProQ2 versions are among the best if not the best single-model program to estimate global model accuracy, with ProQ2-refine being slightly better overall and on the easy targets, while VoroMQA and MULTICOMNOVEL are better on the hard targets. It is interesting that in terms of model selection the pure clustering methods are much worse than single-model methods. In particular for hard targets where the Z-score for the pure clustering methods Pcons and DAVIS-QAconsensus is almost random (RZ hard 3.9 and RZ hard 6.5), compared to the much higher Z-score for the best single-model methods (RZ hard 40). For easy targets the clusteringThe summed Z-score for the first ranked model selected by each method, for all, easy and hard targets. Single-model methods in bold, pure clustering in italics, and the others are using a combination of single-model and clustering. This method was added after CASP as a reference. Refs: 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 , 5 , 6 (Q.), methods still have an advantage over single-model method, but overall the only methods that are better than the best single-model methods are methods that combine the best single-model methods with clustering. MULTICOM-CONSTRUCT is using the MULTICOM single-model methods and Wallner is using ProQ2 together with Pcons, the latter improved the RZ all from 58.6 to 99.6. This clearly shows that single-model methods are very useful in model selection in particular in combination with clustering methods. The global quality prediction in ProQ2 is actually based on the predicted local error. The local error estimates from ProQ2 was recently combined with Phaser to enable molecular replacement for more targets and using poorer models , clearly demonstrating the added value of local model error prediction for solving crystal structure by molecular replacement. The local model prediction accuracy for the CASP11 targets was assessed using ROC curves with a 3.8 A cutoff for correct residues . Here, ProQ2 is clearly much better than all other single-model methods identifying 30 more correct residues compared to the second best, Wang_deep_3, at 10 FPR, and over twice as many for the methods that performed equally well or in some cases even better than ProQ2 in model selection. There is a similar trend for the CAMEO data , but the margins up to the reference consensus method ModFOLD4 and best other single-model method, Qmean_7.11 are smaller. For both CASP11 and CAMEO data there are no noticeable difference between ProQ2 and ProQ2_refine on the local level. To conclude, there is still a performance gap between the singlemodel methods and the consensus methods overall. However, the single-model methods are clearly much better in global model selection on hard targets and they are also useful in combination with consensus methods, demonstrated by the performance of the Wallner method, which combines Pcons and ProQ2. Finally, among the methods benchmarked in CASP11 and CAMEO, ProQ2 is currently the single-model method that performs best in both global and local model accuracy prediction. Conflict of Interest: none declared.. Local model prediction accuracy for (A) CASP11 and (B) CAMEO for all single-model methods and one reference consensus method shown as a dotted line using 3.8 A as a cutoff for correct residues. Methods are ordered according to the AUC, which is also shown next to the method name. ModFold4 in CAMEO runs in quasi-single mode, which means that the input is a single model and the consensus ensemble is constructed internally 
