Structural bioinformatics ProQM-resample: improved model quality assessment for membrane proteins by limited conformational sampling Model Quality Assessment Programs (MQAPs) are used to predict the quality of modeled protein structures. These usually use two approaches: methods using consensus of many alternative models and methods requiring only a single model to do its prediction. The consensus methods are useful to improve overall accuracy; however , they frequently fail to pick out the best possible model and cannot be used to generate and score new structures. Single-model methods, on the other hand, do not have these inherent shortcomings and can be used to both sample new structures and improve existing consensus methods. Here, we present ProQM-resample, a membrane protein-specific single-model MQAP, that couples side-chain resam-pling with MQAP rescoring by ProQM to improve model selection. The side-chain resampling is able to improve side-chain packing for 96 of all models, and improve model selection by 24 as measured by the sum of the Z-score for the first-ranked model (from 25.0 to 31.1), even better than the state-of-the-art consensus method Pcons. The improved model selection can be attributed to the improved side-chain quality, which enables the MQAP to rescue good backbone models with poor side-chain packing. Availability and implementation: http://proqm.wallnerlab.org/down load/.Protein structure modeling represents a fundamental challenge in structural bioinformatics and is crucial for a detailed understanding of the structure and biological function of molecules. It can be used to guide and explain experiments, as well as for prediction of proteins whose structure, in particular for membrane proteins, for the most part is unknown ($0.5 membrane protein in the Protein Data Bank $25 in most genomes). A common technique in structure modeling is to generate many alternative models and use a Model Quality Assessment Program (MQAP) to select the best model. Alternatively, an MQAP can also be used to assess the absolute quality of a single model, i.e. a measure that is related to similarity to true native structure . ProQM is an MQAP that uses a support vector machine to predict the quality of a membrane protein model by combining structural and sequence-based features calculated from the model. In its original implementation, external programs were used to calculate features, e.g. PSI-BLAST , PSIPRED , Naccess (Hubbard and), Stride , ProQres , Zpred , Topcons , MPRAP (Illergard) and SVM-light . These dependencies made it difficult to distribute the program, run large batches and use it in conformational sampling. Therefore, ProQM has only been available as a webserver for small-scale use. To overcome these issues, ProQM was incorporated as scoring function in the Rosetta modeling framework. This gives in one hand full access to the modeling machinery within Rosetta and allows for easy integration with any Rosetta protocol. In particular, ProQM-resample uses the repack protocol to sample side-chain conformations followed by rescoring using ProQM to improve model selection.First, the ProQM implementation in Rosetta was compared with the original ProQM-webserver version. They should be similar, but because of different implementations of Naccess and DSSP versus STRIDE, and the fixing of some minor bugs, the results will not be identical. Still, there is a clear correlation, R 0.98, between ProQM-Rosetta and ProQM-webserver and the prediction performance is also maintained, R 0.62 to true answer (data not shown). The benchmark on the EVfold_membrane set showed that model selection is significantly improved by resampling the side-chains (. Already without any sampling ProQM selects slightly better models than EVFOLD-MQAP (Z 25.0 versus 24.4). Side-chain sampling increases the performance significantly to Z 31.1 and levels out at around 10 resamples per model, surpassing even the state-of-the-art consensus Pcons. This demonstrates the usefulness of single-model MQAPs in model selection. It also highlights the need to include sidechain sampling into the MQAP procedure to avoid losing good backbone models suffering from poor side-chain packing. A possible reason for the improved selection is the fact that almost all models (96) improved the side-chain packing after resampling (Supplementary). Before resampling, the sidechain quality is roughly the same for all targets . But after resampling the side-chain improvement is larger for the set of targets that also show backbone improvement after resampling compared with targets that show no improvement in backbone, indicating that improved side-chains help the MQAP to select better backbone models.. Overall target selection for ProQM-resample measured by the sum of the Z-score for first-ranked models against the number of generated resampled models; Pcons, ProQM and EVFOLD-MQAP are included as reference; error bars correspond to SD resulting from 100 replicas; these were also used to calculate the P-values 
