Systems biology protr/ProtrWeb: R package and web server for generating various numerical representation schemes of protein sequences Amino acid sequence-derived structural and physiochemical descriptors are extensively utilized for the research of structural, functional, expression and interaction profiles of proteins and peptides. We developed protr, a comprehensive R package for generating various numerical representation schemes of proteins and peptides from amino acid sequence. The package calculates eight descriptor groups composed of 22 types of commonly used descriptors that include about 22 700 descriptor values. It allows users to select amino acid properties from the AAindex database, and use self-defined properties to construct customized descriptors. For proteochemometric mod-eling, it calculates six types of scales-based descriptors derived by various dimensionality reduction methods. The protr package also integrates the functionality of similarity score computation derived by protein sequence alignment and Gene Ontology semantic similarity measures within a list of proteins, and calculates profile-based protein features based on position-specific scoring matrix. We also developed ProtrWeb, a user-friendly web server for calculating descriptors presented in the protr package. Availability and implementation: The protr package is freely available from CRAN: http://cran. r-project.org/packageprotr, ProtrWeb, is freely available at http://protrweb.Protein sequence is the ultimate resource for functional protein research. In order to apply various machine learning approaches on protein sequence data, it is common practice to encode sequence information as numerical features. The type of encoding, however, can significantly affect analyses, and choosing a precise and effective encoding is a critical step . In bioinformatics, sequence-derived structural and physicochemical features have been widely applied in the research of protein structure and functions during the past two decades, such as, protein structural and functional classes , proteinprotein interactions , subcellular locations and peptides of specific properties , and post-translational modifications . In chemogenomics, these structural and physicochemical descriptors are also routinely used to characterize target proteins in drugtarget pairs for potential drugtarget interaction discovery (, b). In proteochemometric (PCM) modeling , continuous descriptors derived by various molecular descriptor sets and dimensionality reduction methods (van) are successfully employed in several applications, such as DNA binding pattern analysis, compound selection in lead optimization (van), novel ligand discovery (van), proteases ligand selectivity modeling and predicting resistance to pesticides for agrochemicals (van). Moreover, for protein and peptides, amino acid sequence and annotation-based similarity scores derived from sequence alignments and Gene Ontology (GO) annotation comparison are also useful representation schemes, which are widely used in modeling, such as genome-wide inference of proteinprotein interactions . Several web servers and stand-alone programs, such as PROFEAT , PseAAC , propy have been established to calculate such structural and physicochemical descriptors. However, currently available solutions are often limited to certain types of descriptors, lack flexibility and usually difficult to seamlessly integrate into the predictive modeling pipeline. We still urgently need a comprehensive and flexible toolkit to calculate and customize these descriptors. Here, we introduce protr and ProtrWeb, the R package and web server for calculating various numerical representation schemes of protein and peptides from amino acid sequence. We recommend using protr to represent the proteins or peptides under investigation. Besides, in the context of systems biology, we hope that protr will be useful for exploring the biological questions about structures, functions and interactions of proteins and peptides.To the best of our knowledge, protr is currently the most comprehensive, flexible and integrated open-source toolkit for protein sequence-derived structural and physiochemical descriptor computation. Users can select appropriate descriptors calculated by protr or ProtrWeb according to their needs, and conveniently apply various statistical analysis and machine learning methods in R to solve various biological questions concerning the structures, functions and interactions of proteins and peptides. Users of the protr package need to intelligently evaluate the underlying details of the descriptors provided, instead of using protr with their data blindly. It would be wise to use some negative and positive control comparisons where relevant to help guide interpretation of the results. The protr package has been intensively tested to guarantee the computation correctness and speed. To ensure that our calculation is accurate, the calculated descriptor values were compared with the known values for these sequences. In future development of protr, it is a potential direction to incorporate 3D structural information of proteins , which would be beneficial in several analysis and modeling scenerios. 
