Sequence analysis Protter: interactive protein feature visualization and integration with experimental proteomic data The ability to integrate and visualize experimental proteomic evidence in the context of rich protein feature annotations represents an unmet need of the proteomics community. Here we present Protter, a web-based tool that supports interactive protein data analysis and hypothesis generation by visualizing both annotated sequence features and experimental proteomic data in the context of protein topology. Protter supports numerous proteomic file formats and automatically integrates a variety of reference protein annotation sources, which can be readily extended via modular plug-ins. A built-in export function produces publication-quality customized protein illustrations, also for large datasets. Visualizations of surfa-ceome datasets show the specific utility of Protter for the integrated visual analysis of membrane proteins and peptide selection for targeted proteomics. Availability and implementation: The Protter web application is available atVisualization of features within biological sequences is essential for integrated analysis and interpretation of experimental sequencing data. Software solutions to visualize nucleic acid sequences such as genomic DNA in the context of rich feature annotations (e.g. genes, promoters) and experimental evidence (e.g. RNA-Seq reads) have become indispensable research tools for interactive data analysis and hypothesis generation. Prominent examples include the UCSC genome browser and IGV . In contrast, only few tools support the visualization of protein features such as post-translational modifications (PTMs) or protein domains within the context of a proteins topology andlike the examples abovedown to single residue resolution. These include RbDe , TMRPres2D and TOPO2 (http://www.sacs.ucsf.edu/TOPO2). Importantly, none of these tools integrates experimental proteomic data in an automated fashion (see Supplementary Table S1 andfor a detailed comparison). To exploit the unique insights into protein structure and function that experimental proteomic data provide, tools are needed that would allow for their integrated visualization, interactive analysis and hypothesis generation . For membrane proteins, which carry out many essential cellular functions and represent more than half of all current drug targets , taking into account the topology is particularly important. Protter is an interactive and customizable web-based application that enables the integration and visualization of both annotated and predicted protein sequence features together with experimental proteomic evidence for peptides and PTMs, onto the transmembrane topology of a protein. It allows users to choose from numerous annotation sources, integrate own proteomics data files, select best-suited peptides for targeted quantitative proteomics applications and export publication-quality illustrations.The Protter web application enables users to generate custom protein feature visualizations right in their browser by following four easy steps: (i) A UniProt identifier or a protein sequence is specified. (ii) The proteins transmembrane topology is defined. (iii) Various protein features (e.g. PTMs, secondary structure, sequence motifs, custom regions of interest, etc.; see Supplementaryfor supported annotation sources) are highlighted. (iv) Additional options for the visualization are set. Selected features are highlighted in the residue-based protein diagram by varying four parameters: the color of the amino acid letter, the shape of the amino acid symbol, the symbols frame color and the symbols background color. As Protter chooses appropriate default settings automatically, all but the first step are optional. The interactive visualization of the chosen protein is displayed freely scalable in the browser . An online help guides the user through all steps and provides documentation on underlying annotation sources and technologies used. A distinctive key feature of Protter is the ability to overlay experimental proteomic data either from individual experiments [result files of PeptideProphet , ProteinProphet , Mascot , MaxQuant and Skyline are supported] or large data collections like PeptideAtlas. Identified proteins, peptides and PTMs can be inspected individually in the browser and a combined visualization of all proteins can be downloaded as one PDF document or as ZIP archive of separate files.Protter supports several common usage scenarios, such as the visual inspection of a proteins transmembrane topology, the integrated assessment of both predicted and experimental peptide and PTM evidence, the generation of publication-quality figures and a wide range of specific applications in proteomics research:Protter supports targeted proteomic approaches like selected reaction monitoring (SRM) , which are based on selection of peptides that unambiguously identify and reproducibly quantify a specific protein of interest. Through integrated visualization of protease cleavage sites, peptide evidence classes , previously experimentally identified peptides [e.g. from PeptideAtlas, UniPep , N-glycoprotein SRMAtlas (, transmembrane regions and any known PTM or sequence variant, suitable peptide candidates can be visualized and selected intuitively before the actual and after the proteomic experiment (see Supplementary). To facilitate this process, Protter is supported via a plug-in from the leading targeted proteomics software environment Skyline (see Supplementary). Proteomic evidence from surfaceome research generates glycopeptide-derived topological constraints , where visualization using Protter aids in the better prediction and validation of the actual transmembrane topology of cell surface proteins (see Supplementary).Ligand-based receptor-capture (LRC) technology allows MS-based identification of receptor proteins to orphan ligands. Potential receptors need to have cell surfaceexposed N-glycosylation sites within MScompatible tryptic peptides to be identifiable. Using a Protter visualization, one can judge at a glance whether a potential receptor will be amenable to LRC technology. Phosphorylation site identifications from phosphoproteomic screens can be visualized in the context of annotated phosphorylation sites as well as known protein kinase sequence motifs, giving a direct hint on a proteins potential role in the cell signaling network.Experimentally identified peptides from large datasets can be easily visualized via the web interface, as demonstrated in a combined PDF (Supplementary) of 267 plots visualizing proteins with predicted transmembrane domains from the first complete membrane proteome described . This big dataset was visualized in only a couple of minutesless than it takes to create a single protein plot using any of the other tools. 
