Gene expression A note on the false discovery rate of novel peptides in proteogenomics Motivation: Proteogenomics has been well accepted as a tool to discover novel genes. In most conventional proteogenomic studies, a global false discovery rate is used to filter out false posi-tives for identifying credible novel peptides. However, it has been found that the actual level of false positives in novel peptides is often out of control and behaves differently for different genomes. Results: To quantitatively model this problem, we theoretically analyze the subgroup false discovery rates of annotated and novel peptides. Our analysis shows that the annotation completeness ratio of a genome is the dominant factor influencing the subgroup FDR of novel peptides. Experimental results on two real datasets of Escherichia coli and Mycobacterium tuberculosis support our conjecture.Tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS)-based proteogenomics has been applied to refinement of annotated genes, discovery of novel genes , personal genomics and disease-related studies . Unlike traditional genomic annotation techniques, such as in silico (ab initio or comparative) or cDNA-seq-based methods, proteogenomics allows validating proteincoding genes directly at the protein level, which is more favorable . To identify novel genes, researchers usually search the experimental MS/MS spectra against a large protein database that is constructed from the genomic or transcriptomic sequences and filter the search results to control the false discovery rate (FDR). It has been observed previously that, under a fixed FDR, the inflated database generated by, e.g. six-open-reading-frame (6-ORF) translation of a whole genome significantly decreases the sensitivity of peptide identification . However, few studies probe into the effect of the large database on the estimated FDR, especially for the novel peptides. Most proteogenomic studies estimate a global FDR for all peptide identifications . That is, the identifications of annotated peptides and novel peptides are subject to FDR estimation in combination. Some researchers noted the high actual FDR of novel peptides and therefore employed more stringent filtering strategies, e.g. post error probability or separate FDRs for annotated and novel peptides (highlighted that for well-annotated genomes, such as the Escherichia coli genome, the post error probability distribution ofBy removing some genes from a completely annotated database based on their summed length, we could perform numerical simulation of h. Then, experimental FDR ann x, which is the ratio of the number of identified annotated decoys to the number of annotated targets, and FDR new x, which is the ratio of the number of identified novel decoys to the number of novel targets, can be calculated and compared to the theoretical onesconcluded that the E.coli genome might have achieved a complete annotation. We downloaded one of these E.colis datasets from PeptideAtlas, which consisted of six raw files (trypsin digested, SAX_01$SAX_06), 300 032 MS/MS spectra in total. The latest genome sequence and annotation data (NC_000913.3) were downloaded from the NCBI website. First, a stop-to-stop 6-ORF translation was applied to the E.colis genome, and a commonly used contaminant database containing porcine trypsin and human keratins was concatenated. The simply reversed form of each protein sequence in the combined database was added, resulting in a combined target-decoy database to facilitate FDR estimation . Next, the MS/MS spectra were searched against the combined database using pFind studio (version 2.8). Peptides were digested in silico with up to two missed cleavages allowed, and carbamidomethylation on cysteine was set as the fix modification and oxidation on methionine as the variable modification. The precursor and fragment mass error tolerances were set to 6 20 ppm and 6 0.5 Da, respectively. A global peptide-level FDR of 1 was used for quality assessment, which allowed us to identify 12 835 peptides. Among these peptides, 113 were contaminant ones, 12 619 were annotated ones and 103 were novel ones. Since the E.colis genome has been almost completely annotated, the 103 novel target identifications should be mostly false ones. Just as expected, among the 128 decoy identifications above the threshold of FDR 1, 97 were novel decoys, very close to the number of novel targets, indicating that the subgroup FDR of novel peptides was close to 1 (97/103 0.94). To simulate h, we randomly removed some genes from the annotated database to vary the ratio of their summed length to all genes. Using the same global FDR threshold of 1, we obtained the numbers of targets and decoys separately on annotated and novel peptides, allowing us to calculate the experimental FDR ann x and FDR new x. Given h and l, the theoretical FDR ann x and FDR new x were also calculated through Equations (2) and (3). Our simulation showed that, the experimental FDR ann x were close to the theoretical value of 1.5, with a minimum of 2.1 and a maximum of 3.6. Moreover, the experimental FDR new x fits well with the theoretical counterpart, as shown in. On the other hand, we can deduce the value of h from the experimental FDR new x based on Equation (3). As shown in, the pairs of sampled and deduced values of h distribute diagonally, indicating that the deduced h could be used as an estimate of the real annotation completeness ratio. We also found that if we remove the novel genes from the annotated database and search the spectra of novel peptides (identified by 6-ORF translation search) against the partially annotated database, then these spectra will be assigned with false peptides and random scores (see Supplementary Materials S2 and S3 for more details). 
