PSI-Search: iterative HOE-reduced profile SSEARCH searching Iterative similarity searches with PSI-BLAST position-specific score matrices (PSSMs) find many more homologs than single searches, but PSSMs can be contaminated when homologous alignments are extended into unrelated protein domainshomologous over-extension (HOE). PSI-Search combines an optimal SmithWaterman local alignment sequence search, using SSEARCH, with the PSI-BLAST profile construction strategy. An optional sequence boundary-masking procedure, which prevents alignments from being extended after they are initially included, can reduce HOE errors in the PSSM profile. Preventing HOE improves selectivity for both PSI-BLAST and PSI-Search, but PSI-Search has 4-fold better selectivity than PSI-BLAST and similar sensitivity at 50 and 60 family coverage. PSI-Search is also produces 2-for 4-fold fewer false-positives than JackHMMER, but is 5 less sensitive.PSI-BLAST uses an iterative strategy to construct a protein profile, in the form of a position-specific score matrix (PSSM), which dramatically improves homology detection in diverse protein families. Improved versions of PSI-BLAST have more accurate statistics and more sensitive consensus profiles , but the most common cause of PSI-BLAST errors is contamination of the PSSM by extension of an homologous domain into a non-homologous region (homologous over-extension, HOE) . Even searches with a single welldefined domain do not guarantee uncontaminated profiles . Some HOE errors can be reduced by profile cleaning;) focuses on long insertions, but requires insertion boundaries to be specified by the user, thus assuming a priori knowledge of the domain structure of the query protein.Five iterative search strategiesPSI-BLAST (standard and HOE-reduced), PSI-Search (standard and HOE-reduced) and JackHMMER (were evaluated on the RefProtDom benchmark queries (500 sampled domain-embedded sequences) against the RefProtDom benchmark database using an E-value threshold of 0.001. JackHMMER is another iterative search tool that uses Hidden Markov Models(HMMs) rather than a PSSM. The output alignments from the fifth iteration were classified into true positives (TPs) and false positives (FPs,). At 50 family coverage, PSI-Search reduces the weighted fraction of errors from 4.5 (PSI-BLAST) to 2.9 (PSI-Search). Reducing HOE improves sensitivity even more, to 1.7 for HOE-reduced PSIBLAST and 0.5 for HOE-reduced PSI-Search. At 50 coverage, JackHMMER performs very well using its statistical alignment envelope, producing only 1 weighted FPs, but its selectivity is worse than PSI-Search or HOE-reduced PSI-Search at 60 and 75 coverage. Overall, HOE-reduced PSI-Search is 9-fold more selective than PSI-BLAST. At the end of iteration 5, 78.3, 79.5, 77.3, 78.8 and 82.5 of weighted homologs are found by PSI-BLAST, PSI-Search, HOE-reduced PSI-BLAST, HOE-reduced PSI-Search and JackHMMER respectively. Thus, (i) HOE-reduction greatly improves search selectivity with a small cost in sensitivity in both PSI-BLAST and PSI-Search; (ii) Both PSI-Search and JackHMMER are more sensitive and selective than PSI-BLAST; (iii) HOEreduced PSI-Search is more selective, but slightly less sensitive, than JackHMMER. JackHMMER is the most sensitive tool, but HOE-reduced PSI-Search is the most selective iterative tool. 
