Sequence analysis Acceleration of short and long DNA read mapping without loss of accuracy using suffix array HPG Aligner applies suffix arrays for DNA read mapping. This implementation produces a highly sensitive and extremely fast mapping of DNA reads that scales up almost linearly with read length. The approach presented here is faster (over 20 for long reads) and more sensitive (over 98 in a wide range of read lengths) than the current state-of-the-art mappers. HPG Aligner is not only an optimal alternative for current sequencers but also the only solution available to cope with longer reads and growing throughputs produced by forthcoming sequencing technologies. Availability and implementation: https://github.com/opencb/hpg-aligner.Among the many applications of the high-throughput sequencing (HTS) technologies, DNA resequencing is probably the most extensively used because of its important clinical implications . The most time-consuming step in HTS data processing is the mapping process, for which many tools are already available . However, while accuracy of short reads mapping process is quite reasonable, speed still remains to be an issue. And, moreover, given the way in which available mappers implement current state-of-the-art mapping algorithms, such as Burroughs-Wheeler Transform, accuracy usually falls down as read length increases because of the accumulation of errors. Therefore, there is an obvious need of new approaches that overcome these current and future problems, given that the trend in HTS technologies is to increase read length and throughput . Suffix array (SA) has recently started to be applied to accelerate DNA or RNA read mapping. Here, we propose an approach, based on SA , that enormously increases the mapping speed without sacrificing accuracy for an ample range of read lengths.We have compared the proposed aligner to the most extensively used DNA-seq mappers, BWA 0.7.5a MEM and Bowtie 2 2.1.0 . Benchmarks were performed in a high-end machine with two hexa-core Intel Xeon E5645 2.40 GHz CPUs and 48 GB of memory. All executions were done using the 12 cores available and memory use was monitored. HPG Aligner showed a memory peak of 32 GB. 
