A novel and versatile computational tool to model translation Motivation: Much is now known about the mechanistic details of gene translation. There are also rapid advances in high-throughput technologies to determine quantitative aspects of the system. As a consequence-realistic and system-wide simulation models of translation are now feasible. Such models are also needed as devices to integrate a large volume of highly fragmented data known about translation.Progress in biotechnological methods means that we now have a very good working knowledge of the biological components that are essential for gene translation. Moreover, rapid improvement of quantitative methods in high-throughput biology enables us to obtain kinetic rate constants and other parameters of the system. To date there are no available tools that allow the user to develop a quantitative system-wide understanding of translation from the available data. In this application note, we present a generic model of translation that can be used precisely for this purpose. It can be parameterized to describe translation of any eukaryotic or prokaryotic cell. The model can be used to answer fundamental questions about the dynamics of translation, including its limiting factors under various conditions. Moreover, it could also be of significant practical and industrial utility, for example within bioprocessing to understand how recombinant protein impacts on the translation of endogenous genes. Prima facia translation is a driven walk of ribosomes over a sequence of codons contained on the mRNA. A ribosome can only progress to the next codon if an aa-tRNA has bound to it and delivered its amino acid to the growing polypeptide. There are a number of couplings between system variables. Transcripts interact with one another via the competition for aa-tRNA and ribosomes. To whom correspondence should be addressed. Within a polysome, ribosomes may collide with one another potentially resulting in traffic jams that may slow down translation significantly. The relative importance of these interactions is parameter and hence species dependent. There have been many previous attempts to model translation. None of those provides a system-wide and dynamic representation of the system. The biophysical mechanism of polypeptide elongation as an 18-step process that has first been described by. Zouridis and Hatzimanikatis (2007) have performed a sensitivity analysis of the variables involved in the translation process and also modelled translation of a single transcript.modelled translation as a totally asymmetric exclusion process. While they provide analytic insights specifically illuminating the effects of ribosomeribosome interactions on transcripts, their model assumptions are by necessity too simplified to provide a comprehensive insight into the various factors influencing translation dynamics.presented a stochastic mean-field model of translation where the heterogeneity of the model transcript population is represented by its average sequence. While this model reproduces overall features of the translation system well, its mean-field assumption leaves out crucial aspects relating to transcripttranscript competition for ribosomes as well as translation initiation. Most recently,presented a model based on a master equation approach. This model does not represent free ribosomes explicitly, nor does it take into account competition for aa-tRNA or ribosomes.The tool described here uses a hybrid approach mixing agentbased techniques with event-driven stochastic simulation algorithms . The individual mRNAs are explicitly represented as strings of codons; they also contain an initial binding site that summarizes the 5-UTR of every transcript. Each transcript can be occupied by one or more ribosomes. The spatial arrangement of codons makes it necessary to keep track of the position of individual ribosomes on the mRNA; consequently, ribosomes are represented as agents encapsulating information about the particular transcript they are bound to, the position thereon as well as information about the tRNA they are interacting with. Individual tRNA molecules on the other hand are assumed to be perfectly mixed within the cell compartment and need not be accounted for individually. Therefore, the model merely tracks the number of amino-acylated, uncharged, bound and unbound tRNAs. The total numbers of tRNA, mRNA and ribosomes are assumed to be unchanged over the course of a simulation run.The software is written in Java (version 1.6) and runs on any computer platform that supports a Java virtual machine. Parameters are entered via parameter files. The user can select the ORFs to be expressed (using FASTA format) and specify mRNA copy numbers and ribosomemRNA affinities for each ORF. During execution, the program outputs data whenever a ribosome has finished a translation round. This output includes the ORF that has just been translated, the translation time, the length of the ORF and the proportion of free ribosomes. Upon completion, the program also outputs a summary file with comprehensive statistics about each codon and ORF including translation error, usage rates (for codons and tRNA) and total translation numbers and polysome sizes for individual ORFs. The run-time of the model depends on the parameters, the number of transcripts to be simulated and the number of ribosomes. Using realistic parameters for Saccharomyces cerevisiae, we found that 15 000 s of translation can be simulated within 5 days using a single core of a 2 GHz Intel Xeon processor. 
