Sequence analysis Quantifying uniformity of mapped reads We describe a tool for quantifying the uniformity of mapped reads in high-throughput sequencing experiments. Our statistic directly measures the uniformity of both read position and fragment length, and we explain how to compute a P-value that can be used to quantify biases arising from experimental protocols and mapping procedures. Our method is useful for comparing different protocols in experiments such as RNA-Seq. Availability and implementation: We provide a freely available and open source python script that can be used to analyze raw read data or reads mapped to transcripts in BAM format atIn biological experiments, controlling the quality of data is fundamental to the reliability and reproducibility of the results. Quality control is especially important in modern sequencing experiments, where small biases in the preparation of DNA libraries can be amplified in the subsequent sequencing steps which typically yield millions of reads. Sequenced reads ideally represent fragments sampled uniformly at random from a library, and expected coverage statistics can be obtained from the classic LanderWaterman model Lander and. However, a key aspect of current experiments is variable fragment length, requiring the extension of the Lander Waterman model to account for random fragment position as well as length. Such a generalization was described inwhere it was shown that the data from a sequencing experiment can be modeled by a two-dimensional spatial Poisson process. We present a statistical test for uniformity in the reads of a sequencing experiment based on this idea and show how it can be used to compare multiple sets of reads in order to assess different protocols. Our test requires the alignment of paired-end reads to a reference transcriptome so that fragment positions and lengths can be determined. Fortunately, such alignments are routinely produced after sequencing experiments, so that our test can easily be incorporated into sequencing analysis pipelines.We applied our statistical test to examine a variety of popular RNA-Seq protocols. Using data analyzed in, we compare seven paired-end methods on 1464 transcripts in the yeast genome. Supplementarygives transcriptby-transcript summary statistics for the log probabilities. There are multiple criteria for selecting an RNA-Seq protocal, but using ReadSpy we find that the dUTP protocol is statistically most randommeaning least biasedwhich agrees with. Additionally, we make pairwise comparisons between the methods, which can be found in Supplementary Table S2. For each pair, the binomial test addresses statistically whether or not one method wins on more often than the other. The P-values for this test are also listed in Supplementary Table S2. Our findings mostly agree with the results of; however, our method illustrates the variability in sequence uniformity among genes. For instance,gives the point sets for dUTP protocol and two yeast genes: YDR007W (in A) and YJL078C (in B). When comparing all seven methods, dUTP achieved p 1:2e 19 for YJL140W and p .27 for YKL041W. A low P-value indicates that the reads aligning to the transcript are not uniform, which is undesirable. One can visually see the difference inbetween non-random (in A) and random (in B). 
