Data and text mining Quantitative trait prediction based on genetic marker-array data, a simulation study Motivation: Using simulation studies for quantitative trait loci (QTL), we evaluate the prediction quality of regression models that include as covariates single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) genetic markers which did not achieve genome-wide significance in the original genome-wide association study, but were among the SNPs with the smallest P-value for the selected association test. We compare the results of such regression models to the standard approach which is to include only SNPs that achieve genome-wide significance. Using mean square prediction error as the model metric, our simulation results suggest that by using the coefficient of determination (R 2) value as a guideline to increase or reduce the number of SNPs included in the regression model, we can achieve better prediction quality than the standard approach. However, important parameters such as trait heritability, the approximate number of QTLs, etc. have to be determined from previous studies or have to be estimated accurately.Height is one of the classic human traits studied by many statisticians. It is easy to measure and data are readily available. Galton and Fisher studied the problem extensively. Using a model of polygenesa large number of independently segregating genes, each contributes a small, equal and direct effect on the observed continuous phenotype, Fisher illustrated that Mendelian approach and the Biometric approach to population genetics can be bridged using height as an example . There are many subsequent studies on the genetic variations of height in different population. Height is found to be highly heritable. Its heritability is 0.8 for European populations and 0.65 for Asian populations . With the advent of genome-wide SNP-chip technology, it is now feasible to search for genetic associations with height at a genome-wide level. Several genome-wide association studies (GWASs) for height have been conducted by) and have been combined using meta-analysis approaches. Based on a total sample size of To whom correspondence should be addressed.We examine scenarios with different number of QTLs (200, 500 and 1000) and different values of the overall heritability (h 2 = 0.1,0.3,0.5,0.7,0.9). In terms of the genetic effect sizes of each QTL, we evaluate two models: an additive uniform genetic model where each QTLs contribution is equal (, , ,...) and an additive geometric where each QTLs contribution follows a geometric sequence (, 2 , 3 ,...) to the effect of the trait To assess the performance of the standard approach, i.e. the inclusion of SNPs in the regression model that achieve genomewide significance, we assess the statistical power to discover the QTLs in the training dataset. For the additive uniform genetic model, our simulation results are summarized inSNPs in the regression model increases, the number of non-QTL also increases and eventually, the quality of the prediction is affected. The association tests find most of the QTLs if the heritability is high. For traits with lower heritability, more non-QTLs will be included by chance. However, as expected, the value for R 2 continues to increase as the number of predictive SNPs increases and seems to be a good indicator of the number of QTLs found. Note that the R 2 value we used is computed directly from the training set. Theoretically, it is always bounded between 0 and 1. It is different from the R 2 value from the validation dataset. If R 2 is small (0.2), the signal is too weak to detect the QTLs. Too many non-QTLs are included in the predictive set; hence, the prediction outcome will be poor regardless. However, if R 2 is sufficiently large (0.5), it indicates that most of the QTLs have already been included. The prediction outcome will be reasonable if we just use or reduce the number of significant SNPs for the prediction model. For values of R 2 between 0.2 and 0.5, we can safely increase the number of SNPs in the prediction model if we want to improve the quality of prediction. If a reference/validation dataset is available, the actual number of SNPs to be included in the prediction model can be set to where the minimum MSPE is. For the additive geometric genetic model, the association signal is concentrated on a very small number of QTLs. The effects from subsequent QTLs beyond the first few are too weak to be detected in the training set and also too small to contribute substantially to the prediction model. The results are summarized in the plots of. Since this scenario for the QTL distribution is not supported by current GWASs, it is not further discussed in this manuscript. Besides uniform and geometric series, a recent paper byproposes a method to estimate the effect size distribution based on GWAS. We have not assessed the different prediction qualities based on those distribution estimates in this report.As we have demonstrated by the simple linear regression technique, it is very difficult to determine the optimal number of markers that should be used for prediction. The minimum MSPE (and probably other metrics as well) depends on other model parameters. The standard model, which uses only the significant SNPs, was compared Page: 748 745748 
