Random distance dependent attachment as a model for neural network generation in the Caenorhabditis elegans Motivation: The topology of the network induced by the neurons connectivitys in the Caenorhabditis elegans differs from most common random networks. The neurons positions of the C.elegans have been previously explained as being optimal to induce the required network wiring. We here propose a complementary explanation that the network wiring is the direct result of a local stochastic synapse formation process. Results: We show that a model based on the physical distance between neurons can explain the C.elegans neural network structure, specifically, we demonstrate that a simple model based on a geometrical synapse formation probability and the inhibition of short coherent cycles can explain the properties of the C.elegans neural network. We suggest this model as an initial framework to discuss neural network generation and as a first step toward the development of models for more advanced creatures. In order to measure the circle frequency in the network, a novel graph-theory circle length measurement algorithm is proposed. Contact:Neural networks can have up to 100 billion synapses . The information defining the position of each synapse is not hard coded into the genome, since the number of genes coding for the properties of the neural network does not exceed a few hundred, even for the complex network of the Homo sapiens . Axon guidance, for example, is determined by a few tens of genes [specifically 93 in the Caenorhabditis elegans] mainly Nertins, Ephrins and Semphorins . The position of each synapse must therefore be determined by other means. The synapse positions can be a combination of genetically coded hardwired connections, stochastic processes or learning mechanisms . The relation between the neurons positions and the network wiring has been extensively studied in the context of optimal wiring (; To whom correspondence should be addressed.; Perez-Escudero and). The neuron positioning was proposed to be optimized to minimize the total axon and dendrite lengths . The neuron positions were indeed found to reduce the wiring length (compared to a random positioning). However, it is not clear whether the neuron positioning is optimized to minimize the wiring or if the short wiring is simply the result of the preferential attachment of nearby neurons. The only currently existing fully mapped neural network is the one of the CE. As part of the CE project, a full map of the CE cells was produced, and all neurons and synapses were mapped . The observed CE has 302 neurons and 2170 synapses, which are divided into motor, sensor and intermediate neurons. A wide distribution of synaptic connections characterizes the CE network. Neurons with a high number of synaptic connections are mostly localized on the main nerve ring. The nerve rings, bundles of 100 axons encircling the outside of the pharynx, are the principal circumferential tracts in the CE nervous system . Axons from sensory neurons in the anterior ganglia form six labial nerves that enter the nerve ring at its anterior margin. Most axons from neurons in the lateral ganglia enter the nerve ring at its posterior margin either laterally or ventrally via the ventral ganglion. Other neurons, such as sensors and motor neurons, are naturally localized near the edges of the nematode. However, there are also a large number of sensors near the pharynx because the pharynx centralizes much of the sensory activity of the nematode. In the current work, we propose to study the CE NN generation mechanism using network theory tools. We represent the CE NN neurons as nodes and synapses as edges. Hundreds of network generation mechanisms were proposed in the last few years, some very generic and some specific to a given network (e.g. among many others . The simplest network generation mechanism model was suggested by. In this model, a network is constructed by randomly connecting nodes. For a given Erdos Renyi Network with n nodes [ERN(n,p)], the probability of connecting each pair is p. This network has a Poisson degree distribution, 1 and short average geodesic distances between nodes. 2Page: 648 647652The network properties of the CE NN differ from most known networks. The CE NN stands half-way between an ERN and a scale free network. The CE NN degree distribution is neither a power law (black line in), nor a Poisson distribution. The CE NN has a large number of nodes with a very low degree on one side and a fat tail on the other side. The CE NN clustering coefficient is high (0.19 versus 0.016 in parallel ERN). Its shortest paths distribution is also longer than the one typical to ERN , and it has a peculiar small-scale motif distribution (Supplementary). The CE NN degree distribution also differs from the one expected in a Strogatz and Watts model . The CE NN evolves through cell division and synapse formation over a limited spatial region . Neurons with distant soma have a lower probability of being connected, as can be seen from the observed distribution of synapses and pre-synaptic soma physical distances . Note that some of the neurons are long and span most of the nematode body affecting the distance distribution. The probability of connecting two neurons decreases with the distance between the soma centers. If only neurons with short span are considered, the decrease is approximately geometrical with a power between 2 and 3, except for a small group of distal connections that will be further discussed. We here propose an attachment model that follows the observed node position and synapse distance distributions. All neurons were placed in their observed experimental position, and the probability of creating an edge between two neurons was defined as: p(i j) = c d i,j . In order to test the validity of our model, we tested whether the model reproduces the generic features of the observed CE NN. The only free parameter in the simulation is . We run multiple simulations with different values of , and for each such value, we did 50 simulations. Most of the properties of the LS are similar to the CE NN for 2.5 (and). The average geodesic distance (4.004 against 4.01 0.1), the full shortest path distribution and the average connectivity (244.1 6.67properties, the simulated spatial network and an ERN. The upper left drawing represents the nodes shortest paths distribution, where the similarity between the real CE NN and the local simulation (LS) network can be seen, in contrast with the ERN. The lower left panel represents the degree distribution on a loglog scale. The upper right drawing is the connectivity distribution and the lower right drawing is the betweenness centrality distribution. In all drawings, one can clearly see the similarity between the CE NN and the LS network, and the difference to the ERN.the physical distance distribution of neurons with short spans as a fraction of the total nematode body length. In neurons which are long and span most of the nematode body (more than half the size of the nematode), the neuron itself contributes significantly to the physical distance and the physical distance distribution of all connected neuron pairs is flat (full gray line). against 239.4) are similar between the LS and the CE NN, and very different from the ERN or SFN. The connectivity of node i is defined as the number of nodes in its connected component. The only feature that is different between the LS and the CE NN is the clustering coefficient, which is 2 SD away from the LS results. The SD of each Page: 650 647652The CE NN is currently the only fully mapped network. Beyond its obvious physical parameters (size, number of neurons, number of synapses and the physical position of the neurons), it has several well-defined properties, such as its peculiar degree distribution, clustering coefficient, centrality and shortest distance and circle distribution. This fully mapped network allows us to test if the network structure is predetermined and rigid, or is based on a simple stochastic process. We have tested the simplest stochastic process where the probability of creating a synapse decreases geometrically with the physical distance. This model contains a single parameter and can explain the vast majority of the network properties. The main difference between the proposed model and the experimentally measured CE NN is the low number of coherent circles in the observed network. This may be due to a secondary process that limits useless very short information cycles and increasing the number and length of long circles. Such an inhibitory process is reasonable, taking into account that most axon guidance and neural adhesion genes are inhibitory. Thus, the network generation is a mixture of spatial and functional limitations. The proposed model suggests that the network properties can be explained by the need to maintain global connectivity and a local structure. Such a balance leads to the creation of local nerve rings with a high internal clustering on the one hand and the creation of long range axons on the other hand. At the mathematical level, these two requirements limit the values of to a very narrow range and explain most of the network properties. A complementary view of neural networks is that the neurons positions have evolved over long periods to minimize the wiring length. Neuron positions may have evolved to optimize some functionality, for example, through the aggregation of neurons in rings. However, the observed minimal wiring length cannot serve as a proof for such a mechanism. The proper positioning of neurons based on their wiring properties can be an artifact of the network generation mechanism. We have applied an optimal wiring algorithm to the network produced by the simulation and obtained a average error of 0.17 0.03 in the node positions (random positions would give 0.35 0.01). A similar error was obtained when the CE NN was used. The analysis was performed assuming a single synapse between each pair of connected neurons. While the nematodes NN is much simpler than that of primates and advanced vertebrates, its generation rule may hint to the way much more complex networks are generated. One may extrapolate from these results two basic building elements: (i) a local stochastic creation mechanism combined with functional limitations on short coherent circles, (ii) local structure and long range connectivity need to be maintained. Such a model can be the prototype for the way the structure of large complex networks can be theoretically coded by a very small number of genes. 
