Genetics and population analysis RAREMETAL: fast and powerful meta-analysis for rare variants RAREMETAL is a computationally efficient tool for meta-analysis of rare variants genotyped using sequencing or arrays. RAREMETAL facilitates analyses of individual studies, accommodates a variety of input file formats, handles related and unrelated individuals , executes both single variant and burden tests and performs conditional association analyses. Availability and implementation: http://genome.sph.umich.edu/wiki/ RAREMETAL for executables, source code, documentation andIn genomewide association studies, meta-analysis has been key in establishing association between common variants and complex traits . Recent advances in exome sequencing and the development of exome genotyping arrays are enabling complex disease studies to explore association between rare variants of clear functional consequence and complex traits. For these rare variants, single variant tests can lack power, and association tests that group rare variants by gene or functional unit are favored . Here, we describe a tool for meta-analysis of rare variant association studies for quantitative traits. Our tool enables individual studies to account for study-specific covariates as well as family and population structure. In addition, it generates summaries of linkage disequilibrium information that allow association tests for groups of rare variants during meta-analysis.One of our primary considerations in RAREMETAL was support for standard, easy-to-implement input formats. RMW uses Merlin format input files to retrieve phenotypes, covariates and family structure and VCF files to retrieve genotypes . Checks are implemented for a variety of problems in input files, including formatting errors, X-linked genotypes that are inconsistent with reported sex and matching of identifiers across files. RMW and RAREMETAL are implemented in C++. Source code and binary executables are available from our web site. For convenience, input and output files can be processed directly in GZIP format. We have also tested compilation on several Linux, MAC OS X and Windows platforms. 
