Gene expression Rcount: simple and flexible RNA-Seq read counting Analysis of differential gene expression by RNA sequen-cing (RNA-Seq) is frequently done using feature counts, i.e. the number of reads mapping to a gene. However, commonly used count algorithms (e.g. HTSeq) do not address the problem of reads aligning with multiple locations in the genome (multireads) or reads aligning with positions where two or more genes overlap (ambiguous reads). Rcount specifically addresses these issues. Furthermore, Rcount allows the user to assign priorities to certain feature types (e.g. higher priority for protein-coding genes compared to rRNA-coding genes) or to add flanking regions. Availability and implementation: Rcount provides a fast and easy-to-use graphical user interface requiring no command line or programming skills. It is implemented in C++ using the SeqAn (www.seqan. de) and the Qt libraries (qt-project.org). Source code and 64 bit binaries for (Ubuntu) Linux, Windows (7) and MacOSX are released under the GPLv3 license and are freely available on github.com/ MWSchmid/Rcount. Contact: marcschmid@gmx.ch Supplementary information: Test data, genome annotation files, useful Python and R scripts and a step-by-step user guide (including run-time and memory usage tests) are available on github.com/ MWSchmid/Rcount.RNA-Seq is the method of choice for transcriptional profiling and differential expression (DE) studies. For DE analysis, methods based on negative binomial modeling, such as the popular DESeq and edgeR , have been shown to outperform other methods in terms of specificity, sensitivity and control of false positives . Current work flows for DE analysis generally involve the (i) alignment of the short reads to a reference genome, (ii) quantification of expression levels and (iii) comparison between different treatments, tissue/cell types and time-points . Read counting and read summarization are essential steps in any RNA-Seq workflow. However, they have received little attention. Specifically for RNA-Seq, counting is not as simple as it may appear. First, a read may align multiple times with the genome (multireads). Second, several genes may overlap at a given position within the genome. Reads aligning with those positions are ambiguous with respect to the gene they originate from (ambiguous reads). Third, alignments can span exonjunctions (exon-junction reads). Furthermore, a gene may have several isoforms. However, DE analysis is often performed using the total number of reads per gene. Popular open source tools for read counting, such as HTSeq (www-huber.embl.de/users/anders/HTSeq), BEDTools and featureCounts , do not specifically address all three issues. Multireads are not treated specifically by any of these programs and are generally discarded, although this problem has been addressed for ChIP-Seq data analysis . Ambiguous reads are counted repeatedly for each gene by BEDTools and featureCounts (optionally), whereas HTSeq discards them. HTSeq and featureCounts both consider exon-junction reads, whereas BEDTools does not. ERANGE addresses all three problems, but uses RPKM (reads per kilobase per million) instead of counts throughout the whole algorithm. Moreover, a conversion to counts during the algorithm is not possible . Here we describe Rcount, a fast and simple GUI tool for flexible RNA-Seq read counting. It builds on the algorithm described in, and further allows for editing the genome annotation and assigning priorities to certain feature types (seefor details on genomic feature types). 
