ReadXplorer 2-detailed read mapping analysis and visualization from one single source Motivation: The vast amount of already available and currently generated read mapping data requires comprehensive visualization, and should benefit from bioinformatics tools offering a wide spectrum of analysis functionality from just one source. Appropriate handling of multiple mapped reads during mapping analyses remains an issue that demands improvement. Results: The capabilities of the read mapping analysis and visualization tool ReadXplorer were vastly enhanced. Here, we present an even finer granulated read mapping classification, improving the level of detail for analyses and visualizations. The spectrum of automatic analysis functions has been broadened to include genome rearrangement detection as well as correlation analysis between two mapping data sets. Existing functions were refined and enhanced, namely the computation of differentially expressed genes, the read count and normalization analysis and the transcription start site (TSS) detection. Additionally, ReadXplorer 2 features a highly improved support for large eukaryotic data sets and a command line version, enabling its integration into workflows. Finally, the new version is now able to display any kind of tabular results from other bioinformatics tools.We used ReadXplorer 2 for the evaluation of an Arabidopsis thaliana RNA-Seq test data set that was generated for this purpose. Several of the aspects described above were addressed, namely extended read classification, improved handling of eukaryotic data and the DESeq2 integration. The experiment focused on differential gene expression analysis between the A. thaliana Col-0 wild-type and a myb11-12-111 triplemutant line (Supplementary methods); array-based data for this biological material are available . Three biological replicates, each of them consisting of two technical replicates, were created from wild-type and mutant each. The 12 samples produced 183 million usable reads that were mapped to the TAIR 10 A. thaliana Col-0 reference. Besides visual inspection, we started the analysis with a read count and normalization calculation , to check the integrity of the biological and technical replicates. This was achieved by plotting their TPM values against each other to check for correlation (Supplementary). For all except one technical replicate, the resulting expression values corresponded to each other (were located close to the 45 diagonal). Thus, the problematic technical replicate was excluded from further analysis. Further investigation showed that in the problematic sample rRNA removal was incomplete. This experimental complication occurs at low frequency with the RNA-Seq kits from Illumina. To identify differentially expressed genes between the wild type and the mutant and simultaneously monitor the effect of employing the extended read mapping classification, we applied DESeq2 via ReadXplorer 2 twice with different included read mapping classes. Once, we only used the uniquely mapped reads and in the second case, we used the Single Perfect and Single Best Match mapping classes also including reads with a distinctive best mapping. The latter selection enabled us to include on average 1,400,000 more reads per data set in the analysis (Supplemental), leading to more accurate gene expression values and minimizing underestimation of expression levels. This effect can be observed even in the most differentially expressed genes . Two examples are the genes AT5G46900 and AT4G12510. Their mean expression is increased from 299 to 379 reads in the first case and from 135 to 189 reads in the second case. These and other examples (Supplementary) convincingly show that the level of differential gene expression is underestimated if only uniquely mapped reads are used. In total, the expression of 13,850 of all 28,775 annotated genes is underestimated. Of these, 1896 genes can be assigned 100 and 153 genes 1000 additional mappings when applying the extended read classification. The comparison of the DESeq2 results between only incorporating uniquely mapped reads and using the Single Perfect and Single Best Match mapping classes is shown in SupplementaryAdditionally, we show in Supplementary Table S4 that ReadXplorer 2 offers several unique features and combines many useful features that are not present in this composition in one of the other commonly used read mapping visualization tools like Savant , IGB , Artemis , IGV and GenomeView . Finally, we assessed the performance of analysis functions offered by ReadXplorer 2. We benchmarked the performance on small (6 mb), medium (120 mb) and large (3 gb) reference genomes (Supplementary). This assessment also includes a comparative runtime benchmark between ReadXplorer 1 and ReadXplorer 2 (Supplementary). The results show that on the same hardware the new version of our software significantly outperforms the older release when the same tasks are executed.The comprehensive read mapping data visualization and automatic analysis tool ReadXplorer 2 features substantially enhanced capabilities from one source. The major improvement presented here is the extended read mapping classification which leads to more specific analysis results as shown in the results section. Further, the extended classification enables meaningful integration of multiple mapped reads and creates awareness for the different types of multiple mapped reads, e.g. to identify repetitive regions . Moreover, two newly implemented analysis functions and substantial improvement of existing analyses widen the spectrum covered by ReadXplorer 2 and enable the user to screen for genome rearrangements and correlation between two data sets without the need to install additional software. The read count normalization can now be compared between different samples as the added TPM normalization is invariant between samples. With DESeq2 another widely used differential gene expression analysis package is available from within the software. The enhanced TSS detection allows deeper insights into the TSS landscape by analyzing additional properties of the TSS and presenting them to the user. The application range of ReadXplorer 2 is further broadened by improving the handling of eukaryotic data. Using our A. thaliana RNA-Seq data set, we were able to successfully evaluate the new features and could show that the enhanced read classification helps to improve the analysis results. With the new command line interface, integration into automatic analysis pipelines is enabled. This allows handling experiments with many samples more efficiently than in the graphical user interface as only a single command is needed to import all data and subsequently run all desired analyses. Finally, integration of results from multiple tools and viewing the read mapping data along with analysis results is important for researchers. Therefore, the new possibility to import arbitrary data tables starting with a genomic position column aids this need. 
