RIBER/DIBER: a software suite for crystal content analysis in the studies of protein–nucleic acid complexes Co-crystallization experiments of proteins with nucleic acids do not guarantee that both components are present in the crystal. We have previously developed DIBER to predict crystal content when protein and DNA are present in the crystallization mix. Here, we present RIBER, which should be used when protein and RNA are in the crystallization drop. The combined RIBER/DIBER suite builds on machine learning techniques to make reliable, quantitative predictions of crystal content for non-expert users and high-throughput crystallography. Availability: The program source code, Linux binaries and a web server are available at http://diber.iimcb.gov.pl/ RIBER/DIBER requires diffraction data to at least 3.0 resolution in MTZ or CIF (web server only) format.Protein crystallographers who work on proteinnucleic acid complexes routinely face the problem that crystals that grow in a co-crystallization experiment do not necessarily contain all components present in the solution. The crystal content can be clarified by spectroscopic methods, but the equipment for such measurements is not commonly available. Alternatively, crystals can be washed, dissolved and analyzed by gel electrophoresis with appropriate staining, but this method is labor intensive, destructive and does not always provide a clear-cut answer. In this work, we present the new program RIBER for detecting the presence of RNA stems in macromolecular crystals based on diffraction data alone. RIBER complements the previously developed program DIBER intended to search for double-stranded B-DNA and not doublestranded A-RNA . The two programs are implemented as a stand-alone software suite and a web server RIBER/DIBER providing an easy way to judge nucleic acid content of a crystal based on a diffraction dataset, before the crystal structure is solved. To whom correspondence should be addressed.The method may help to avoid a laborious phasing procedure when the component or the complex of interest is not present in the crystal.Both RIBER and DIBER extract two parameters from the dataset: the first is a measure of a unit cell size and is primarily used to distinguish nucleic acid crystals from all others. The second parameter is a measure for the largest local average of reflection intensities. A large value for this parameter indicates the presence of very characteristic diffraction signals related to the regular stacking of A-RNA or B-DNA base pairs. A support vector machine (SVM) is used to make a prediction, using either only the two parameters described above or optionally also a third score (combined mode, available for DIBER only), which is calculated with the help of the molecular replacement program PHASER for those users who hold a license (free for academic users). DIBER and RIBER use similar parameterizations of the diffraction data and a SVM to classify crystal content. 
