Riboswitch Scanner: an efficient pHMM-based web-server to detect riboswitches in genomic sequences Riboswitches are non-coding RNA located in the 5 0 untranslated regions where they bind a target metabolite used to specify the riboswitch class and control the expression of associated genes. Accurate identification of riboswitches is the first step towards understanding their regulatory and functional roles in the cell. In this article, we describe a new web application named Riboswitch Scanner which provides an automated pipeline for pHMM-based detection of riboswitches in partial as well as complete genomic sequences rapidly, with high sensitivity and specificity. Availability and implementation: Riboswitch Scanner can be freely accessed on the web atRiboswitches are cis-regulatory genomic segments that control the expression of downstream genes by undergoing conformational changes on ligand binding . They are mainly found in bacteria but have also been detected in a few eukaryotes . Riboswitches are categorized into different classes according to the type of ligand and secondary structure. High sequence level conservation and structural similarity are found in the aptamer domain of the riboswitches belonging to the same class . Riboswitches control the expression of genes that are involved in biosynthesis and transport of the ligands as well as transcription factors . In view of their important regulatory role in bacteria and a few eukaryotes, it is essential to develop tools for accurate identification of different classes of riboswitches. Several approaches have been developed for computational identifications of riboswitches. An influential and one of the earliest programs adapted for riboswitch search is Infernal based on the covariance model (CM). Rfam databases are dependent on CMs for annotation of ncRNAs. But, construction of CMs is computationally expensive and accuracy of CM is sensitive to the quality of input multiple sequence alignment and no user-friendly riboswitch-specific web-servers are available for this method. RibEx (Abreu) is a web-based tool capable of detecting riboswitches based on sequence motifs that are unique to a specific class. It is less sensitive for riboswitch classes that are characterized by short length and simple sequence motifs. The RiboSW web-server is able to identify 12 classes of riboswitches based on the structural conformations and sequence conservation within the functional region. But, TPP and Cobalamin riboswitches are difficult to detect with their method. Limitation of all these web-tools is that they impose upper bounds on the length of the input sequences and none of these tools are capable of detecting riboswitch from whole genome sequences. The Denison Riboswitch Detector (DRD) webserver was developed to predict 13 classes of riboswitches from DNA sequences based on a dynamic programming algorithm. The DRD algorithm considers mismatches which are likely to yield more false positives . Recently, a riboswitch identification method was proposed (V C The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com 2015b) that combines the accuracy of structure-based predictions with the speed of sequence-based methods by exploiting an inverse RNA folding problem solver. In this application note, we describe a new web-based tool for accurate detection of riboswitches using a method based on profile Hidden Markov Models (pHMM). These are appropriate for modeling sequence profiles and searching databases for remotely homologous sequences . By exploiting the high level of sequence conservations of the aptamer domain in every class of riboswitches, we had previously demonstrated that pHMM methods are able to identify potential riboswitches in whole genome sequences accurately and much faster than Infernal CMs search. The latest Infernal 1.1 package currently available which uses accelerated pHMM and HMM-banded CM alignment methods and has reduced CM search times compared with older Infernal versions with little cost to detection sensitivity. However, if for searching sequences with CMs, the e-value calibration step is needed, the computing time of CM models increases substantially. Construction of riboswitch models to search of sequence databases require less computing time with pHMMs. With this motivation we developed a pHMM-based web-application named Riboswitch Scanner for predicting putative riboswitches along with their locations in genomic sequences for 24 classes of riboswitches. Moreover, users can also search new riboswitch classes. Riboswitch Scanner detects the putative riboswitches with higher accuracy than other available web-based tools for riboswitch discovery. Therefore, the Riboswitch Scanner provides more efficient alternative riboswitch detection tool that assist in the development of automated genome annotations.The webserver allows the user to submit nucleotide sequences in FASTA format. The input sequence can be a segment of a genome (such as a 5 0 UTR region of a gene) or the complete genome. The user can input the sequence by pasting it in the textbox or by using the file upload facility. More than one riboswitch class can be selected at a time by checking the appropriate boxes besides each class. In order to search for riboswitches beyond the classes listed, the user can select the other option in the riboswitch family sections and create their own riboswitch classes by uploading at least four seed sequences in FASTA format. This generates the pHMM for the new class and searches the input sequence for instances of this user-defined riboswitch.The results of riboswitch searches, for each of the selected riboswitch classes, in the main strand (5 0 3 0 ) and complementary strand (3 0 5 0 ) of the genome are returned in the output page in a userfriendly format. If the selected family of riboswitch is present in the genome, the riboswitch locations, E-value and pHMM score is generated for every detected riboswitch. Riboswitch sequences based on locations are extracted and given in the output page. Supplementary File 2 shows a sample output page. The secondary structures based on minimum free energy of riboswitches predicted by pHMM are provided using dot-bracket notations. RNAfold generated folded structure for each of the predicted riboswitches and the consensus secondary structure image (courtesy of Rfam) of the selected riboswitch family can be downloaded in a zip file from the link provided in the output page. The secondary structure images obtained using RNAfold are named in the format seq_StartPosition-EndPosition_riboswitch so that they can be easily correlated with the corresponding hits listed in the output page. Therefore, the user can further verify the pHMM-predicted riboswitches by comparing the folding pattern of the predicted riboswitches with the consensus Rfam image of this riboswitch family. The performance of the tool for all classes was evaluated through 5-fold cross-validations. In 5-fold cross validations, each class of riboswitch seed sequence datasets was randomly divided into five sets. The training and testing of every class has been carried out five times, each time using one distinct set for training and remaining four sets for testing. The overall performance of a riboswitch model is the average performance over five sets. In comparison with other available web-based tools for riboswitch detection, Riboswitch Scanner detects riboswitches with higher sensitivity. Sensitivity and specificity of Riboswitch Scanner for all classes of riboswitches and relative comparison of sensitivity of Riboswitch Scanner with other existing web-based tools are given in the Supplementary File 1. Sensitivity and specificity are calculated based on the predictions of Rfam seed sequences. 
