Gene expression An R package to analyse LC/MS metabolomic data: MAIT (Metabolite Automatic Identification Toolkit) Current tools for liquid chromatography and mass spec-trometry for metabolomic data cover a limited number of processing steps, whereas online tools are hard to use in a programmable fashion. This article introduces the Metabolite Automatic Identification Toolkit (MAIT) package, which makes it possible for users to perform meta-bolomic end-to-end liquid chromatography and mass spectrometry data analysis. MAIT is focused on improving the peak annotation stage and provides essential tools to validate statistical analysis results. MAIT generates output files with the statistical results, peak annotation and metabolite identification. Availability and implementation: http://b2slab.upc.edu/software-and-downloads/metabolite-automatic-identification-toolkit/.Liquid chromatography and mass spectrometry (LC/MS) is an analytical technique used widely in metabolomics to detect molecules in biological samples . A wide array of software tools is available for LC/MS profiling data analysis, including commercial, programmatic and online tools. A commercial example is Analyst , whereas some open-source packages permit programmatic processing, such as the R package XCMS to detect peaks or CAMERA and AStream for peak annotations. There have been efforts on just peak annotation using JAVA . MZmine and mzMatch are modularized tools coded in JAVA that are focused on LC/MS data preprocessing and visualization . Online tools permit sample processing through a web Graphical User Interface, such as XCMSOnline (http://xcmsonline.scripps.edu) or MetaboAnalyst . Refer to Supplementaryfor a comparative between the capabilities for some of the main available tools. In this context, we introduce a new R package called Metabolite Automatic Identification Toolkit (MAIT) for automatic LC/MS analysis. The goal of the MAIT package is to provide an array of tools that makes programmable metabolomic end-to-end statistical analysis possible (see Section 3 of the Supplementary Material for details about the MAIT modularity). MAIT includes functions to improve peak annotation through the process called biotransformations and to assess the predictive power of statistically significant metabolites that quantify class separability.The example data files are a subset of the data used in the reference , which are distributed freely through the faahKO package . MAIT was used to read and analyse these samples using the functions depicted in(see the tutorial in the Supplementary Information). The significant features for each class are found using statistical tests and analysed through the different plots that MAIT produces. Using the following function call, 2640 peaks were detected:At this point, the first annotation stage is launched:Next, we gather the significant features from the peaks detected. After the Welchs tests, 106 of these features were found to be significant through the spectralSigFeatures function. Statistical plots such as heat maps, boxplots and principal component analysis score plots can be generated (Supplementary Figs S3 and S4). Significant features are annotated after checking for certain neutral losses (biotransformations). R4 MAIT 5-spectralSigFeatures(MAIT, P 0.05) R4 MAIT 5-Biotransformations(MAIT, peakPrecision 0.005) By using only the SSF, a validation stage is launched, obtaining a classification ratio of 100 with three training samples for all classifiers. These results suggest that the significant variables separate both classes completely. R4 MAIT 5-Validation(MAIT, Iterations 20, trainSamples 3) Finally, the database is mined to identify the significant features. R4 MAIT5-identifyMetabolites(MAIT, peakTolerance 0.005) 
