RPdb: a database of experimentally verified cellular reprogramming records Many cell lines can be reprogrammed to other cell lines by forced expression of a few transcription factors or by specifically designed culture methods, which have attracted a great interest in the field of regenerative medicine and stem cell research. Plenty of cell lines have been used to generate induced pluripotent stem cells (IPSCs) by expressing a group of genes and microRNAs. These IPSCs can differentiate into somatic cells to promote tissue regeneration. Similarly, many somatic cells can be directly reprogrammed to other cells without a stem cell state. All these findings are helpful in searching for new reprogramming methods and understanding the biological mechanism inside. However, to the best of our knowledge, there is still no database dedicated to integrating the reprogramming records. We built RPdb (cellular reprogramming database) to collect cellular reprogramming information and make it easy to access. All entries in RPdb are manually extracted from more than 2000 published articles, which is helpful for researchers in regenerative medicine and cell biology. Availability and Implementation: RPdb is freely available on the web at http://bioinformatics.ustc. edu.cn/rpdb with all major browsers supported.Cellular reprogramming is a process in which one cell type transforms into another cell type by expressing a group of genes and microRNAs, adding chemical molecules or changing cell culture environment . Cellular reprogramming technology, which mainly includes induced pluripotent stem cell (IPSC) generation, IPSC differentiation and direct reprogramming, is considered one of the most important advances in tissue replacement therapies . Somatic cells can be reprogramed to a stem cell-like state, which can differentiate to functional somatic cells. Multiple somatic cells, including blood cells , fibroblasts and hair follicle dermal papilla cells have been successfully reprogrammed to IPSCs. There are also many functional somatic cells that have been generated from IPSCs, such as dopaminergic neurons and retinal cells . Multiple strategies have been used to achieve these goals, including chemical-inducible systems , virus-free transfection, recombinant proteins and microRNAs . Using similar strategies, various somatic cells have been directly converted into other cell types, which are named direct reprogramming or transdifferentiation. Although there are several stem-cell-focused databases, such as SyStemCell and StemCellDB , to the best of our knowledge, there is no database that focuses on comprehensively collecting and analyzing cellular reprogramming V C The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press.The database includes reprogramming records of 250 cell lines, 197 genes and microRNAs, 144 chemical molecules and culture methods and 526 functional annotations. We classify the entries into two categories: Gene and microRNAs and Molecules and culture methods. Users can explore all entries of the database through the Browse page and compare gene expression levels of multiple tissues in the Analysis page. All the results can be downloaded for further analysis. A tutorial for the database is available in the Help page, including searching genes of interest, using the database to obtain reprogramming protocols and downloading the results for further analysis. Detailed information about genes and microRNAs involved in cellular reprogramming can be found in the Gene page, which includes basic gene information, functional information, GO information, protein-protein interactions and regulatory relationships. All functional information is manually extracted from literature describing the role of genes in the reprogramming process. With RPdb, users can find genes, microRNAs and chemical molecules used for reprogramming processes. The Molecules and Culture Methods page lists all chemical molecules and culture methods deposited in RPdb. 
