rTANDEM, an R/Bioconductor package for MS/MS protein identification rTANDEM is an R/Bioconductor package that interfaces the X!Tandem protein identification algorithm. The package can run the multi-threaded algorithm on proteomic data files directly from R. It also provides functions to convert search parameters and results to/ from R as well as functions to manipulate parameters and automate searches. An associated R package, shinyTANDEM, provides a web-based graphical interface to visualize and interpret the results. Together, those two packages form an entry point for a general MS/ MS-based proteomic pipeline in R/Bioconductor. Availability and implementation: rTANDEM and shinyTANDEM are distributed in R/Bioconductor,Protein identification and analysis by tandem mass spectrometry relies mostly on matching spectra to a database of protein sequences and scoring those matches. The resources of the R statistical language and its platform Bioconductor have proven to be well suited for this kind of data manipulation and statistical scoring with regard to genomic data. However, those resources remain largely untapped with regard to proteomic data. This is partly explained by the lack of tools to perform protein identification directly from R. rTANDEM fills this gap by implementing in R the tandem algorithm and various associated scoring functions . rTANDEM also provides functions for conversion to/from R. This brings to proteomics the many advantages of building an analysis pipeline in the R/Bioconductor statistical platform: easy deployment on high-performance computing and cloud computing through Bioconductor Cloud Amazon Machine Image (AMI), fully open-source workflows, interconnectivity of annotation and analytic packages, full reproducibility of analysis, etc. resources of R and Bioconductor . For example, protein accession can be retrieved and passed to biomaRt to retrieve cross-references or annotation, which in turn can be passed to packages like topGO to calculate annotation enrichment and RamiGO to display the Gene Ontology (GO) tree. The online Supplementary Material provides a short tutorial that demonstrates this kind of workflow.rTANDEM was tested on a recently published dataset of breast cancer tissues and compared with the reported results obtained with MaxQuant (v.1.1.1.36). We used raw data obtained from four whole tissue lysate of breast cancer samples. rTANDEM obtained an average of 8044 unique peptide-spectrum matches at an expect value 50.01 for those samples (Supplementary). This represents a noticeable increase compared with the original results from MaxQuant, which reported an average of 6254 peptides per sample at P50.01.The Bioconductor package rTANDEM and its associated graphical interface, shinyTANDEM, form an entry point to build complete proteomics workflows in the R statistical language. They provide ways to perform protein identification directly from R and to convert search results to/from R object. The S4 result data structure makes it easy to use R/Bioconductor to build complex processing pipelines around proteomic datasets. Further statistical tests for quantification in rTANDEM are currently under development. 
