Genetics and population analysis RVTESTS: an efficient and comprehensive tool for rare variant association analysis using sequence data Motivation: Next-generation sequencing technologies have enabled the large-scale assessment of the impact of rare and low-frequency genetic variants for complex human diseases. Gene-level association tests are often performed to analyze rare variants, where multiple rare variants in a gene region are analyzed jointly. Applying gene-level association tests to analyze sequence data often requires integrating multiple heterogeneous sources of information (e.g. annotations, functional prediction scores, allele frequencies, genotypes and phenotypes) to determine the optimal analysis unit and prioritize causal variants. Given the complexity and scale of current sequence datasets and bioinformatics databases, there is a compelling need for more efficient software tools to facilitate these analyses. To answer this challenge, we developed RVTESTS, which implements a broad set of rare variant association statistics and supports the analysis of autosomal and X-linked variants for both unrelated and related individuals. RVTESTS also provides useful companion features for annotating sequence variants, integrating bioinformatics databases, performing data quality control and sample selection. We illustrate the advantages of RVTESTS in functionality and efficiency using the 1000 Genomes Project data. Availability and implementation: RVTESTS is available on Linux, MacOS and Windows. Source code and executable files can be obtained at https://github.com/zhanxw/rvtests Contact:Next-generation sequencing and microarray genotyping have enabled the cost-effective interrogation of a full spectrum of sequence variants. There is considerable interest in understanding the functional role of rare and low-frequency variants in the etiology of complex diseases. Efficient software programs for sequence-based association analysis are in great demand. However, several computational challenges must first be addressed: first, to determine the optimal analysis units and prioritize causal variants in sequenceWe summarize supported features for RVTESTS, VAT and PSEQ in Supplementary Table S1. As stated in Methods, RVTESTS uniquely supports the analyses of related individuals, as well as the analyses of X-linked genes. To our knowledge, both VAT and PSEQ in their current implementations can only analyze unrelated samples. For the shared features of all three tools (e.g. managing sequence datasets and association analyses of unrelated samples), we compared the computational efficiency for data preparation and association analyses using the 1000 Genomes Project Phase 3 dataset. This dataset consists of 2504 individuals genotyped on 84.8 million markers. We simulated continuous phenotypes based on the null model of no genotypephenotype associations. To prepare sequence data for association analyses, VAT and PSEQ require building databases, while RVTESTS requires annotating sequence variants. VAT and PSEQ took 495 and 36 CPU hours, respectively, on a desktop with IntelV R XeonV R CPU E5-2650 v2 @ 2.60 GHz to prepare and import data into SQLite databases. As a comparison, annotating the whole-genome datasets required only 17 h for RVTESTS. It is clear that RVTESTS offers considerable improvement in time complexity. Next, we compared the association analyses results on simulated datasets. We performed single variant tests, as well as simple burden, SKAT and VT tests analyzing rare variants with MAF 5. RVTESTS attains a good balance of time and memory usage compared with other tools, e.g. completing the simple burden test took RVTESTS/PSEQ/VAT a 15.7/60.2/374.8 h, and required 1.6/10.0/ 0.8 GB of RAM (Supplementary). Finally, we evaluated time and memory complexity for linear mixed model analyses of 2504 individualsa unique feature of RVTESTS. The analyses using single variant, simple burden, SKAT and VT tests took 17/19/1514/856 CPU hours. On a workstation with 64 GB RAM, our tool can handle datasets with 64 000 genotyped individuals. Given that the LMM analyses have linear complexity with respect to the number of genes and quadratic complexity with respect to the number of samples (after spectral decompositions), it is clear that RVTESTS can handle large datasets genotyped on tens of millions of markers (Supplementary).In summary, RVTESTS is an efficient and comprehensive tool for sequence-based association analyses. As the cost of sequencing continues to decrease (e.g. a milestone of whole-genome sequencing for $1000 has been recently attained), population-based genetic studies will soon reach another scale. The speed and scalability advantage of RVTESTS will be even more critical when applied to these ultralarge scale datasets. We envision that our program will continue to make valuable contributions to the study of rare genetic variants in complex human diseases. 
