Genome analysis Scaffolding pre-assembled contigs using SSPACE De novo assembly tools play a main role in reconstructing genomes from next-generation sequencing (NGS) data and usually yield a number of contigs. Using paired-read sequencing data it is possible to assess the order, distance and orientation of contigs and combine them into so-called scaffolds. Although the latter process is a crucial step in finishing genomes, scaffolding algorithms are often built-in functions in de novo assembly tools and cannot be independently controlled. We here present a new tool, called SSPACE, which is a stand-alone scaffolder of pre-assembled contigs using paired-read data. Main features are: a short runtime, multiple library input of paired-end and/or mate pair datasets and possible contig extension with unmapped sequence reads. SSPACE shows promising results on both prokaryote and eukaryote genomic testsets where the amount of initial contigs was reduced by at least 75. Availability: www.baseclear.com/bioinformatics-tools/.The determination of the complete genomic sequence of a new species, also called de novo sequencing, is an important nextgeneration sequencing (NGS) application. The task is to puzzle back millions of short sequence reads into a limited set of contiguous sequences (contigs), although in practice the total number can be rather high. This can partly be attributed to the presence of repetitive elements on the genome. Paired-read sequencing technology may help to reduce the amount of contigs as the known intermediate distance between read pairs can be used to place contigs in their likely order and orientation. The length of the resulting scaffolds (or supercontigs) also reflects the estimated distance between the initial contigs. Illumina for instance supports two types of pairedread libraries: short-insert paired-end and long-insert mate pairs. The combination of these two types of data provides an ideal input for the scaffolding process, as it can potentially resolve repetitive structures of various sizes. Nonetheless, the majority of assembly tools provide a scaffolding option only as a built-in function which cannot be independently controlled, among which SSAKE , Abyss and SOAP . To whom correspondence should be addressed.To date only a few programs are able to scaffold pre-assembled contig sequences. A commonly used tool is Bambus , although it was not designed for the current generation of sequencing technologies. We developed the SSPACE (SSAKE-based Scaffolding of Pre-Assembled Contigs after Extension) program to scaffold pre-assemblies produced by any desired assembly tool. The input is given by a set of contig sequences and Illumina paired-read files. The user can specify whether the paired reads are used only for scaffolding or also for contig extension. We compared our method to the Abyss scaffolder on a bacterial (Escherichia coli) and fungal (Grosmannia clavigera). Both methods significantly reduce the number of contigs in a comparable manner, although SSPACE achieves overall better results. To prove the suitability of SSPACE also on large eukaryotic genomes, we tested its performance against SOAP on the giant panda genome assembly. We show that SSPACE is a valuable tool for scaffolding pre-assembled contigs.The performance of SSPACE was compared with the built-in scaffolder of Abyss on both the E.coli and G.clavigera dataset. The contigs produced by Abyss after its single-end assembly stage served as input for SSPACE. For SSPACE, we used two protocols, one including and one excluding contig-extension. The outcomes are displayed in Tables 1 and 2. Notably, the SSPACE protocols yield a lower amount of scaffolds and a significantly higher N50 value. It can also be observed that the inclusion of contigextension prior to scaffolding yields slightly less scaffolds. We also assessed that the consistency between Abyss and SSPACE results by evaluating the co-occurrence of contig-pairs in the two scaffold sets. The results indicate that Abyss and SSPACE produce comparable scaffolds. Additional results on the E.coli dataset are displayed in Supplementary Table S3. Analyses on the giant panda dataset were performed similarly to the previous two sets. Here, we used the scaffolds produced by SOAP to construct a set of 187.742 unlinked contigs. These were re-scaffolded with SSPACE. The results show that SOAP and SSPACE can concatenate a major fraction of the contigs intoWe have shown that SSPACE is a powerful and effective standalone scaffolder. SSPACE is able to scaffold large genomes in a reasonable amount of time even when using huge datasets. Our method is suited both for prokaryotic and eukaryotic genomes and in comparison with two built-in scaffolders SSPACE achieves competitive results. We demonstrate that applying contig extension prior to scaffolding can further enhance the outcomes. Importantly, SSPACE is designed in a user-friendly manner and requires limited computation resources (Supplementary). We think our method is a useful addition to present NGS de novo assembly tools in the automated reconstruction of genomic sequences. 
