Systems biology Shaping the interaction landscape of bioactive molecules Motivation: Most bioactive molecules perform their action by interacting with proteins or other macromolecules. However, for a significant fraction of them, the primary target remains unknown. In addition, the majority of bioactive molecules have more than one target, many of which are poorly characterized. Computational predictions of bio-active molecule targets based on similarity with known ligands are powerful to narrow down the number of potential targets and to rationalize side effects of known molecules. Results: Using a reference set of 224 412 molecules active on 1700 human proteins, we show that accurate target prediction can be achieved by combining different measures of chemical similarity based on both chemical structure and molecular shape. Our results indicate that the combined approach is especially efficient when no ligand with the same scaffold or from the same chemical series has yet been discovered. We also observe that different combinations of similarity measures are optimal for different molecular properties, such as the number of heavy atoms. This further highlights the importance of considering different classes of similarity measures between new molecules and known ligands to accurately predict their targets.A large number of small molecules ranging from metabolites to signaling molecules to drugs display strong bioactivity in different living systems. This activity is often mediated by physical interactions with proteins or other macromolecules. Therefore, information about the targets of bioactive molecules is crucial to understand, predict and interfere with their activity. In particular, it can be used (i) to predict unfavorable side effects due to off-target interactions and thus potentially decrease the attrition rate in clinical trials due to toxicity , or (ii) to predict a new target for an approved drug and reposition it for another disease . Experimental identification of bioactive molecule targets has received much attention . This has led to technological developments of large facilities enabling researchers to screen a given molecule against arrays of targets, such as kinases. Chemogenomic strategies have also been introduced to identify the targets of bioactive molecules in model organisms such as yeast or bacteria . Several databases have been developed by various groups to provide access to these data, such as ChEMBL , DrugBank , PubChem or ZINC . These databases contain unprecedentedly large datasets of interactions between proteins and small molecules. For instance, only for human protein ligands, the ChEMBL database contains close to 350 000 reported direct interactions (i.e. annotated as binding) with activity 510 mM involving 4200 000 small molecules. However, a significant fraction of bioactive molecules still do not have any known target. This is especially true for compounds tested uniquely in functional assays. For instance, 17.4 of the compounds in ChEMBL with reported functional activity in human cells do not have direct target information (see Methods Section 2.1). Moreover, even for well-studied molecules, our knowledge of their targets is far from complete. For instance, N,N-dimethyltryptamine was initially described as a ligand of sigma-1 receptor . Later on, it was shown to also bind hydroxytryptamine receptors . More generally, one can expect that even a significant fraction of Food and Drug Administration (FDA)approved drugs have at least some unknown target. Computational predictions of bioactive molecule targets are helpful to narrow down the set of potential targets to be tested and to predict off-target effects of known molecules or drugs . A widely used strategy consists in identifying proteins with known ligands similar to a query molecule (i.e. the so-called ligand-based approach). Standard approaches use similarity measures between molecules based on chemical fingerprints . Historically, fingerprint similarity measures have been developed to classify molecules into families. Thus, they are powerful to identify molecules derived from the same chemical series. More recently, other measures of similarity have been introduced . For instance, it is known that the 3D shape of molecules plays an important role when binding to a target. Therefore, the ligands of a protein often display similarity in their shape. This similarity can be quantified by methods based on structural alignment or shape recognition , To whom correspondence should be addressed. The Author 2013. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com such as Ultrafast Shape Recognition. The latter technique was recently expanded to consider partial charges distribution and atomic lipophilicity . A very attractive feature of shape comparison is the ability to detect similarities between molecules with different chemical structures, a property often referred to as scaffold hopping . Despite this advantage, previous studies suggest that fingerprint similarity gives higher performance, both in virtual screening and in target predictions . Yet, it is unclear whether this is due to limitations of shape comparison (e.g. limited conformational sampling, shortcomings of shape descriptors) or to biases in benchmarking datasets (e.g. overrepresentation of ligands from the same chemical series). Other approaches to predict targets of bioactive molecules have been proposed based on higher-level features such as side effects , transcriptional responses and text-mining . Although these approaches are powerful to identify similarities between molecules without chemical similarity, they require additional experimental data and therefore are limited to molecules for which such data are available. For proteins with known structures, binding site similarity can be used to identify proteins that could accommodate similar ligands . Moreover, in this case, docking algorithms can help predict whether a molecule can bind to a target . Here, we develop an original method of bioactive molecule target predictions that combines chemical and shape similarity (see). We perform extensive validation of the method and show that combining these two similarity measures leads to improved performance. This is especially true when predicting the targets of a molecule in the absence of other ligands originating from the same chemical series. Thus, our results suggest that the lower performance of shape similarity measures that was previously reported, is, at least partly, due to biases in available benchmarks . Nevertheless, fingerprintbased methods still perform well even after stringent removal of all molecules that are trivially similar (e.g. with the same scaffold). We also observe that different combinations of similarity measures are optimal for different molecular properties.Identifying proteins with ligands similar to bioactive molecules is a strong indication of possible direct interactions that could predict or explain observed bioactivity. Here, we use the ChEMBL database to collect known ligands of human proteins and we explore different similarity measures, based on chemical structure (Fingerprints) and molecular shape (Electroshape) , as well as combinations of these (see Methods). Target prediction is carried out following the workflow of. A query molecule is compared with all other molecules in ChEMBL to assign a score to each target corresponding to the similarity value with the most similar ligand. When combining different measures of similarity, we use logistic regressions to combine the similarity values obtained with each similarity measure (see Methods). To illustrate the different strategies investigated in this work, in, we show examples of ligands whose target is best predicted by shape similarity , fingerprint similarity) as well as combination of both (and D). In , the query molecule (CHEMBL1240762) has only one reported target (CDK1, IC 50 2.5 mM), and no other ligand of this protein is a simple analog of this molecule. Therefore, predictions based on fingerprint similarity rank this target at position 168 among all 1700 possible targets. Shape similarity instead identifies a ligand of CDK1 that displays similar overall shape and partial charges distribution, and based on the similarity with this molecule, CDK1 is ranked at the fifth position among all targets.shows a frequently encountered case, in which a clear analog (CHEMBL1210985) of the query molecule is present among the ligands of its target. In this case, fingerprint similarity is more appropriate. In particular, the missing hydroxyl groups in the most similar ligand detected by the fingerprint similarity (CHEMBL1210985) result in lower shape similarity that prevents accurate predictions. This example highlights some of the possible weaknesses of shape comparison and already suggests that combining different similarity measures is useful to optimally harness the information present among the ligands of a target. As examples of the combined strategy, we show inand D, typical cases where combining the two kinds of similarity results in better predictions. Here, both shape and fingerprint similarity values give reasonable predictions, with the cognate target being ranked between the 9th and 29th position. However, combining the two kinds of similarities results in significantly better performance, indicating how the presence of different ligands similar to the query molecule according to both similarity measures gives even higher confidence in the predictions. More generally,, first row, shows the average crossvalidation AUC values over all tested ligands. We can observe that fingerprint similarity performs better than shape similarity and the combined approach leads to the highest AUC, although all three approaches give very high AUC values. However, as discussed in the next section, these high AUC values mainly result from the habitual design of chemically related molecules to target the same protein. In particular, cases of close analogs among the ligands of a target (see example in) appear very often in ChEMBL. 
