Structural bioinformatics APOLLO: a quality assessment service for single and multiple protein models We built a web server named APOLLO, which can evaluate the absolute global and local qualities of a single protein model using machine learning methods or the global and local qualities of a pool of models using a pair-wise comparison approach. Based on our evaluations on 107 CASP9 (Critical Assessment of Techniques for Protein Structure Prediction) targets, the predicted quality scores generated from our machine learning and pair-wise methods have an average per-target correlation of 0.671 and 0.917, respectively, with the true model quality scores. Based on our test on 92 CASP9 targets, our predicted absolute local qualities have an average difference of 2.60 with the actual distances to native structure.Protein model quality assessment plays an important role in protein structure prediction and application. Assessing the quality of protein models is essential for ranking models, refining models and using models . Model Quality Assessment Programs (MQAPs) predict model qualities from two perspectives: the global quality of the entire model and the residue-specific local qualities. The techniques often used by MQAPs include multiple-model (clustering) methods , single model methods and hybrid methods . According to the CASP experiments, multiple-model clustering methods are currently more accurate than single model methods. However, they cannot work well if only a small number of models are available. A hybrid quality assessment method was recently developed to combine the two approaches and integrate their respective strengths. Here, we build a web server to provide the community with access to all three model quality assessment approaches (i.e. single, clustering and hybrid). To whom correspondence should be addressed.We assessed most of the methods used by APOLLO on 107 valid CASP9 targets. We downloaded all the CASP9 models from CASP9 (http://predictioncenter.org/download_area/CASP9/) and the experimental structures from the PDB . These PDB files were preprocessed in order to select correct chains and residues that match the CASP9 target sequences. TM-Score was used to align each model with the corresponding native structure and generate its real quality score (GDT-TS). The CASP9 QA predictions made by our methods were evaluated against the actual quality scores by four criteria: average per-target correlation , the average sum of the GDT-TS scores of the top one ranked models, the overall correlation on all targets and the average loss the difference in GDT-TS score between the top ranked model and the best model . The results show that the average correlation can be as high as 0.92 (respectively, 0.67) and the average loss can be as low as 0.057 (respectively, 0.095) for multiple model (respectively, single model). Our multipleand single-model global QA methods were ranked among the most accurate QA methods of their respective kind according to the CASP9 official assessment (http://www.predictioncenter.org/ casp9/doc/presentations/CASP9_QA.pdf). The average per-target correlation of our pair-wise local quality predictions is 0.53, which is also among the top local quality predictors in CASP9. We alsoconducted a blind test of the absolute local quality predictor (trained on the CASP8 dataset) on the CASP9 models of 92 CASP9 single domain proteins. On the residues whose actual distances to the native are 10 and 20 , the average absolute difference between our predicted distances and the actual distances is 2.60 and 3.18 , respectively. 
