Sincell: an R/Bioconductor package for statistical assessment of cell-state hierarchies from single-cell RNA-seq Cell differentiation processes are achieved through a continuum of hierarchical intermediate cell states that might be captured by single-cell RNA seq. Existing computational approaches for the assessment of cell-state hierarchies from single-cell data can be formalized under a general framework composed of (i) a metric to assess cell-to-cell similarities (with or without a dimensionality reduction step) and (ii) a graph-building algorithm (optionally making use of a cell clustering step). The Sincell R package implements a methodological toolbox allowing flexible workflows under such a framework. Furthermore, Sincell contributes new algorithms to provide cell-state hierarchies with statistical support while accounting for stochastic factors in single-cell RNA seq. Graphical representations and functional association tests are provided to interpret hierarchies. The functionalities of Sincell are illustrated in a real case study, which demonstrates its ability to discriminate noisy from stable cell-state hierarchies. Availability and implementation: Sincell is an open-source R/Bioconductor package available at http://bioconductor.org/packages/sincell. A detailed manual and a vignette are provided with the package.Unbiased profiling of individual cells through single-cell RNA-seq allows assessing heterogeneity of transcriptional states within a cell population . In the context of a cell populations differentiation or activation process, such transcriptional heterogeneity might reflect a continuum of intermediate cell states and lineages resulting from dynamic regulatory programs. Such a continuum might be captured through the assessment of cell-state hierarchies, where each cell is placed in a relative ordering in the transcriptional landscape. Additionally, statistical support should be provided to discriminate reliable hierarchies from stochastic heterogeneity, arising from both technical and biological factors.A number of algorithms have been used to assess cell-state hierarchies from single-cell data . These approaches can be formalized under a general framework (Supplementary). Here we present Sincell, an R/Bioconductor package where the various building blocks of that general workflow are extended and combined . Notably, Sincell implements algorithms to provide statistical support to the cell-state hierarchies derived from single-cell RNA-seq. The package is complemented with graphical representations and functional association tests to help interpret the results. 
