Structural bioinformatics Six Rossmannoid folds, including the Class I aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases, share a partial core with the anti-codon-binding domain of a Class II aminoacyl-tRNA synthetase Motivation: Similarities in core residue packing provide evidence for divergence or convergence not reported using other methods. Results: We apply a new method for rapid structure comparison based on Simplicial Neighborhood Analysis of Protein Packing (SNAPP) to the diverse structural classification of proteins (SCOP) /-class of protein folds. The procedure identifies inter-residue packing motifs shared by protein pairs from different folds. A threshold of 0.67 RMSD for all atoms of corresponding residues ensures inclusion of only highly significant similarities comparable with those observed for identical catalytic residues in homologues. Many tertiary packing motifs are shared among the three classical Rossmannoid folds, as well as thousands of other motifs that occur in at least two distinct folds. Merging of neighboring packing motifs facilitated recognition of larger, recurrent substructures or cores. The anti-codon-binding domain of an archeal aminoacyl-tRNA synthetase (aaRS) was discovered to possess a packed core in which eight identical amino acid residues are within 0.55 RMSD of the comparable structure in the FixJ receiver, a member of the Rossmannoid family that also includes the CheY signaling protein and flavodoxin-like proteins. Further investigation identified close variants of this core in five other Rossmannoid folds, including a functionally relevant core in Class Ia aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases. Although it is possible that the two essentially identical cores in the ProRS anti-codon-binding domain and the FixJ receiver converged to the same structure, the consensus core obtained from the structural and sequence alignments suggests that all the implicated protein folds descended from a simpler ancestral protein in which this core provided nucleotide binding and proto-allosteric functions.Demonstrating structural similarities between proteins has long provided the initial evidence for common structural motifs To whom correspondence should be addressed. representing evolutionary divergence or convergence. Most approaches rely on comparing the arrangement of secondary structures or other local substructures in 3D (;). Considerably less development has been devoted to identifying more precise structural details. Comparison methods that focus on precise arrangements of amino acid residues are usually used to identify catalytic, ion binding and small molecule binding sites . Often, the aim is to recognize similarities across distinct protein folds for function prediction or active-site comparisons among homologous protein structures . Such atomic level comparisons have generally not been extended to features outside active sites. Yet, as distantly related proteins with different folds usually have substantial active-site differences, comparing structural features outside the active sites may yield more definitive evidence for divergence from a common ancestor for proteins with specific sub-structural motifs. Central to the present work is identification of tertiary contact motifs found in pairs of proteins from at least two different folds. The method identifies recurrent tertiary contacts between protein secondary structure elements. Similarities are observed at the atomic level of detail where conformations of individual amino acid residues are repeated in similarly packed arrangements of side chains on the secondary structure faces. In conventional analyses, the most regularly repeated features of tertiary contacts observed are residue pairs separated as (i, i + 2) in -strands, and as (i, i + 3) and (i, i + 4) on the surface of -helices . In this work, these residue pairs will be referred to as secondary structure-coupled residues (SCRs). SCRs yield knobs-and-holes that form the close-packed interfaces between secondary structure elements. The regular spacing in sequence and in 3D of SCRs leads to preferred orientations for the secondary structures in 3D that have been observed in similar protein structures. Results presented here demonstrate that tertiary, i.e. non-sequence local arrangements of residues interacting at the interfaces of secondary structure elements yield evolutionary clues that cannot be obtained by comparing one-dimensional motifs. We analyze the structural classification of protein (SCOP) /class of proteins, in which motifs are repeated to form layered sandwich structures with helices on both sides of a central, parallel -sheet. The largest related superfamily of proteins in thisProtein structures from the SCOP /-class were analyzed for SCRAPEs in recurring packing motifs that might help discriminate between evolutionary divergence and convergence. There were 32 180 instances of protein structure pairs from different folds possessing SCRAPE pairs that were within 0.67 RMSD for all atoms. SCRAPES were combined to form composite motifs, revealing a total of 18 107 similarities between protein pairs from distinct folds in the /-class. The overall motif distribution can be visualized by drawing a graph where edges represent the highly significant structural similarities shared by two protein structures.illustrates the protein structure similarity network obtained for the SCOP /-class. The network reveals many precise similarities between proteins from different folds, suggesting many evolutionary connections between members of the /-class. The most prominent feature of the / similarity network is a sub-structure formed from edges connecting the three classical Rossmannoid folds defined in SCOP: Class 2NAD(P)-binding Rossmann; Class 3FAD/NAD(P)-binding domains; Class 4 nucleotide-binding domains .shows 1841 connections between c.2 and c.3, 266 connections between c.2 and c.4 and 285 connections between c.3 and c.4. Each edge represents similarity of at least four residues between fold representatives. The most significant similarities can be observed in graphs that impose a minimum threshold of similar residues.shows a graph representing the). of comparison used here can reveal relationships among proteins that have diverged to the point of having distinct folds, as well as possibly identifying cases of convergence to a common motif.Residues comprising cores shown in2 
