Genetics and population analysis SNPman: a program for genotype calling using run data from TaqMan allelic discrimination The SNPman program calls the genotypes of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) from TaqMan allelic discrimination assays. It utilizes the fluorescence data collected over the whole PCR run, rather than relying on the end point fluorescence measurements that is the basis of the genotype calling process in most software solutions sold with the real-time instruments. This inspection of run data facilitates genotype calls in difficult sample sets, especially in those containing various concentrations of DNA or inhibitors, as indicated by results of a reanalysis of 3738 genotyping samples. The program works with data from three different widely used PCR instruments. Availability: The compiled program is available online atThe TaqMan allelic discrimination is a very popular and widely used medium-throughput genotyping format: the assays use two short minor groove binder (MGB) hydrolysis probes, each annealing to one allelic variant of the genotyped single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) amplified within a short polymerase chain reaction (PCR) product . The TaqMan allelic discrimination is supported by most of real-time PCR platforms; however, their proprietary software solutions utilize mainly the end point analyses, largely overlooking the potential of fluorescence data collected over the whole course of a PCR run. In PCR runs with samples of good quality and comparable quantity, the end point scatter plot suffices for genotype calling. Nevertheless, if the reaction runs in suboptimal conditions (e.g. cheaper alternatives to the brand polymerases are used, the quantity of starting DNA varies or the DNA contains inhibitors), the end point analyses may not effectively discriminate genotypes, because the groups in the scatter plot often stretch or blend together. To whom correspondence should be addressed.We therefore aimed to develop a program that would aid in TaqMan genotype calling across various platforms by enabling a detailed inspection of fluorescence data from the polymerase chain reaction (PCR) runs. In particular, we aimed for improving the genotype call rate in runs with unequally concentrated samples, in home-brew assays and in samples with variable presence of inhibitors.To test whether this algorithm aids in calling alleles that could not be distinguished using proprietary software of the three vendors, we reanalyzed run files that contained genotypes unresolvable by the proprietary software according to the manufacturers instructions. In particular, we concentrated on selecting PCR runs with DNA of poor quality, sample sets of uneven DNA concentration, samples containing varying amounts of inhibitors and runs containing alternative master mix chemistry. We reanalyzed 21 files from ABI7300 with 1814 samples, 6 files from LC480 with 1560 samples and 4 files from Biorad CFX with 479 samples. The files were selected based on previously encountered problems with genotype calling using the proprietary software of the real-time PCR machines, mostly due to strong variations in DNA quantity and quality. The primers and probes for the assays were produced by Applied Biosystems, and were targeted mostly to SNPs withinand adjacent tothe NOD2/CARD15, CTLA4, IFIH1, GCK and PTPN22 genes typed in our previous studies (e.g.). The DNA samples were extracted from human whole blood or saliva using various techniques and archived up to 12 years thereafter. The reanalysis was done independently on the original genotype calls from the instruments software. Both the original analysis and the reanalysis were done by two independent evaluators. The result of the above reanalysis is summarized in: in total, genotypes of 372/3738 samples could not be resolved by the programs sold with the instruments. Of these 372 unresolved genotypes, 116 (31) were then called using the SNPman. Of the genotypes that were called by the instruments software, the SNPman generated five genotypes discordant with the previous calls, and eight samples could not be resolved by SNPman although the instruments analysis yielded a genotype. We did not analyze differences across the three instrument platforms as the success rate of the genotyping heavily depended on the quality and quantity of DNA in the various projects, rather than on the type of the instrument.shows an example of a run that entirely failed in the end point analysis but was successfully sorted into genotypes using our program (this run was not included in the overall analysis). Here, the blending of signals from unevenly concentrated samples is visible toward the end of PCR, which effectively hampered end point analyses using fluorescence data. Note that the graphs C and D aided in genotype calling independently of these fluorescence data,and that moving the vertical line of the crosshair enabled better resolution of the samples in their early amplification. 
