Genome analysis SNPsnap: a Web-based tool for identification and annotation of matched SNPs An important computational step following genome-wide association studies (GWAS) is to assess whether disease or trait-associated single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) enrich for particular biological annotations. SNP-based enrichment analysis needs to account for biases such as co-localization of GWAS signals to gene-dense and high linkage disequilibrium (LD) regions, and correlations of gene size, location and function. The SNPsnap Web server enables SNP-based enrichment analysis by providing matched sets of SNPs that can be used to calibrate background expectations. Specifically, SNPsnap efficiently identifies sets of randomly drawn SNPs that are matched to a set of query SNPs based on allele frequency, number of SNPs in LD, distance to nearest gene and gene density. Availability and implementation: SNPsnap server is available atGenetic loci identified by genome-wide association studies (GWAS) point to biology that help us to understand the etiology of complex traits and diseases . A typical first step following GWAS is to assess whether associated loci as a group implicate biological pathways , or whether associated single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) are enriched for annotations such as non-coding functional elements or missense variants . The simple approach, comparison of associated SNPs with random sets of SNPs, is susceptible to bias from nonrandom clustering of functionally related genes, and the greater likelihood of associated SNPs to be within (large) genes and regions of strong linkage disequilibrium (LD) and other potential confounders . If not properly accounted for by appropriate matching of random sets of SNPs, these biases may lead to spurious enrichments; for instance, brain pathways (typically containing large genes that are more likely to harbor associated SNPs) will appear to be overrepresented in most sets of GWAS loci . The SNPsnap Web server identifies randomly selected SNPs with similar genetic properties as a set of query (associated) SNPs. Random SNPs are matched based on minor allele frequency, number of SNPs in LD (LD buddies), distance to nearest gene and number of nearby genes (gene density). By using sets of random but matched SNPs, investigators can compute enrichment statistics on more appropriate negative controls to get an unbiased empirical estimate of the significance of enrichment results obtained with associated SNPs. We and others have previously used a similar approach , however currently there is no software tool that formally implements this approach. 
