SomaticSignatures: inferring mutational signatures from single-nucleotide variants Mutational signatures are patterns in the occurrence of somatic single-nucleotide variants that can reflect underlying mutational processes. The SomaticSignatures package provides flexible, interoperable and easy-to-use tools that identify such signatures in cancer sequencing data. It facilitates large-scale, cross-dataset estimation of mutational signatures, implements existing methods for pattern decomposition, supports extension through user-defined approaches and integrates with existing Bioconductor workflows. Availability and implementation: The R package SomaticSignatures is available as part of the Bioconductor project. Its documentation provides additional details on the methods and demonstrates applications to biological datasets.Mutational signatures link observed somatic single-nucleotide variants to mutation generating processes . The identification of these signatures offers insights into the evolution, heterogeneity and developmental mechanisms of cancer . Existing softwares offer specialized functionality for this approach and have contributed to the characterization of signatures in multiple cancer types , while their reliance on custom data input and output formats limits integration into common workflows. The SomaticSignatures package aims to encourage wider adoption of mutational signatures in tumor genome analysis by providing an accessible R implementation that supports multiple statistical approaches, scales to large datasets and closely interacts with the data structures and tools of Bioconductor (R Core).SomaticSignatures is a flexible and efficient tool for inferring characteristics of mutational mechanisms, based on the methodology developed by. It integrates with Bioconductor tools for processing and annotating genomic variants. An analysis starts with a set of SNV calls, typically imported from a VCF file and represented as a VRanges object . Since the original calls do not contain information about the sequence context, we construct the mutational motifs first, based on the sequence of a reference or personalized genome. 
