Structural bioinformatics SSpro/ACCpro 5: almost perfect prediction of protein secondary structure and relative solvent accessibility using profiles, machine learning and structural similarity Motivation: Accurately predicting protein secondary structure and relative solvent accessibility is important for the study of protein evolution , structure and function and as a component of protein 3D structure prediction pipelines. Most predictors use a combination of machine learning and profiles, and thus must be retrained and assessed periodically as the number of available protein sequences and structures continues to grow. Results: We present newly trained modular versions of the SSpro and ACCpro predictors of secondary structure and relative solvent accessibility together with their multi-class variants SSpro8 and ACCpro20. We introduce a sharp distinction between the use of sequence similarity alone, typically in the form of sequence profiles at the input level, and the additional use of sequence-based structural similarity, which uses similarity to sequences in the Protein Data Bank to infer annotations at the output level, and study their relative contributions to modern predictors. Using sequence similarity alone, SSpros accuracy is between 79 and 80 (79 for ACCpro) and no other predictor seems to exceed 82. However, when sequence-based structural similarity is added, the accuracy of SSpro rises to 92.9 (90 for ACCpro). Thus, by combining both approaches, these problems appear now to be essentially solved, as an accuracy of 100 cannot be expected for several well-known reasons. These results point also to several open technical challenges, including (i) achieving on the order of 80 accuracy, without using any similarity with known proteins and (ii) achieving on the order of 85 accuracy, using sequence similarity alone. Availability and implementation: SSpro, SSpro8, ACCpro and ACCpro20 programs, data and web servers are available through the SCRATCH suite of protein structure predictors at http://scratch.The prediction of protein structural features, such as secondary structure and relative solvent accessibility, are useful for the study of protein evolution, structure and function and as modular components of protein 3D structure prediction pipelines. Most of the best predictors use a combination of machine learning and evolutionary information, in the form of multiple alignment profiles, and thus must be retrained and assessed periodically as the available protein data continues to grow. Here we present the results obtained by modifying and retraining SSpro and ACCpro , two widely used predictors of secondary structure and relative solvent accessibility, respectively, and broadly assessing prediction performance in these fields. It has been known for two decades that evolutionary information in the form of profiles calculated on similar sequences helps predictors. In the case of secondary structure prediction, for instance, performance accuracy improves by roughly 2 percentage points when profiles are used in the input, as opposed to raw sequences alone. It is also known that using profiles in the output, by predicting the secondary structure of each sequence in an alignment and taking the majority of each column, leads to a smaller improvement (51) over using the raw sequences alone. Furthermore, using profiles in both the input and the output usually leads to no significant improvement over using profiles in the input alone. Machine learning-based predictors developed during the past two decades have been almost exclusively focused and evaluated on their ability to predict the secondary structure or relative solvent accessibility from the sequence or the profile alone. The past decade of work has not produced major prediction improvements, resulting in a set of competing predictors with similar methods, training datasets, protocols and, most importantly, similar prediction performancesfor instance, roughly around 80 for secondary structure prediction. This is despite the number of experimentally solved structure deposited in the Protein Data Bank (PDB) , which has significantly increased over the same period and continues to increase faster each year . However, besides using sequence similarity to create input profiles, there is potentially a second way of using sequence similarity to leverage the growth of the PDB and improve predictions. Namely, if a portion of a query sequence is similar to a sequence in the PDB, it may be possible to use the annotation of the PDB sequence to annotate the query sequence, in lieu or in combination with the prediction produced by the machine learning methods. This is what we call sequence-based structural similarity. Although the correlation between sequence similarity and structure similarity is not perfect , To whom correspondence should be addressed. it is well known that two domains with similar sequences will in general have similar structures . There are good reasons to suspect that sequence-based structural similarity may be effective. A simple analysis of the PDB entries released between 1996 and 2013 (Figs 3 and 4) reveals that as of today, only 6 of the amino acids deposited in the PDB each month belong to protein regions with no similarity to sequences previously deposited in the PDB . Furthermore, this percentage is decreasing year after year. Finally, when we examine the large, redundancy reduced and representative set of all proteins UNIREF50 , we find that 62 of its sequences have at least one domain with a similarity of 30 to a sequence in the PDB. Thus, in short, the main purposes of this article, besides the upgrade of existing predictors, is to study in detail the effectiveness of sequence-based structural similarity for secondary structure and relative solvent accessibility prediction alone, and how it can be combined with predictions derived by machine learning methods with profiles to improve the overall stateof-the-art.Results obtained following the two protocols described in Section 2.3 are summarized in. The accuracy of the predictors on the pdb_full and pdb_ante datasets is obtainedfollowing the P1 protocol, whereas the accuracy of the predictors on the pdb_post dataset is obtained following the P2 protocol. Using both sequence similarity and sequence-based structural similarity, SSpros accuracy is 92.91 on pdb_full and 91.74 when trained on pdb_ante (PDB entries released before May 1, 2012) and evaluated on the 11 213 recent PDB entries in pdb_post (released after May 1, 2012). This is considerably better than any other existing predictor, including the previous release of SSpro . This result, combined with the initial analysis performed on the PDB and UNIREF50 databases (see Section 1), highlights the interest of systematically combining sequence-based structural similarity with profile-based machine learning methods. Without using sequence-based structural similarity, the accuracy of the best secondary structure predictors (including SSpro) is estimated to be between 79 and 82 , thus 10 lower than the accuracy of SSpro after combining the raw predictions with the ones based on known protein structures. It is useful to contrast the combination of both approaches with the use of sequence-based structural similarity alone. For instance, using sequence-based structural similarity alone, predictions can be made for 75 of the amino acids in the dataset pdb_post, with an overall accuracy of 96. SSpros accuracy as a function of sequence similarity and identity is reported in, showing that as soon as similar sequences can be found in the PDB, even with low sequence identity or similarity with the target protein, the prediction accuracy significantly increases. SSpro is also the only secondary structure predictor made publicly available for download, which includes both profile generation and sequence-based structural similarity modules. Similarly, at the 25 accessibility threshold, ACCpro accuracy is 90.02 on pdb_full and 88.22 on pdb_post, above any other predictor, and about 8 better than the accuracy of the previous ACCpro release. A similar detailed evaluation of the predictors accuracy, as a function of sequence identity and similarity, is provided in. Results for SSpro and ACCpro multi-class variants SSpro8 and ACCpro20 also show significant improvements. SSpro8 is the eight-class version of SSpro, predicting the protein secondary structure using the eight different classes assigned by DSSP. The sequence-based structural similarity analysis is available for the first time for this kind of predictor and results in an accuracy of 87.92 on pdb_full and 85.88 on pdb_post, a 22 improvement over the last published accuracy of the SSpro8 predictor. ACCpro20 is the 20-class version of ACCpro predicting if an amino acid is buried or exposed for 20 different relative solvent accessibility thresholds. ACCpro20 prediction accuracy is 89.92 in the hard case (25 accessibility threshold) and is now comparable with the accuracy of ACCpro. Note that both predictors have no other existing method to be directly compared with. Finally, redundancy in the SSpro and ACCpro training sets was reduced using first a 25 sequence identity threshold. This is a common practice in the field, established over the years through many trial and errors and aimed at balancing multiple constraints: in particular redundancy reduction versus training set size. However, there is nothing fundamental about such a threshold, and one might be concerned by the existence of proteins in the training and test sets that are remotely homologous, with a level of sequence identity 525, which could lead to overestimating the accuracy of the predictors. To address this point, first note that we used a more stringent redundancy reduction procedure than a simple 25 identity cutoff by using an additional HSSP distance cutoff (see Section 2). Second, we conducted one additional set of tests. For each test protein in pdb_full, we used PSI-BLAST to extract any segment of length at least 10 with sequence identity of at least 18 with any other protein in the training set. In total, 58 of amino acids in the test set were found to occur in such segments, leaving 42 ofNote: Accuracy reported for the pdb_full and pdb_ante datasets is obtained following protocol P1, and accuracy reported for the pdb_post dataset is obtained following protocol P2. Accuracy reported for ACCpro20 is the accuracy at the 25 accessibility threshold. Accuracy of the newly trained versions of SSpro and ACCpro are reported in bold font. Previous published accuracy of the predictors is also reported . Accuracy of DISTILL and PSIPRED are reported for the same datasets using the downloadable packages made available by the authors (see Section 2.4). 
