Data and text mining Statistical agglomeration: peak summarization for direct infusion lipidomics Motivation: Quantification of lipids is a primary goal in lipidomics. In direct infusion/injection (or shotgun) lipidomics, accurate downstream identification and quantitation requires accurate summarization of repetitive peak measurements. Imprecise peak summarization multiplies downstream error by propagating into species identification and intensity estimation. To our knowledge, this is the first analysis of direct infusion peak summarization in the literature. Results: We present two novel peak summarization algorithms for direct infusion samples and compare them with an off-machine ad hoc summarization algorithm as well as with the propriety Xcalibur algorithm. Our statistical agglomeration algorithm reduces peakwise error by 38 mass/charge (m/z) and 44 (intensity) compared with the ad hoc method over three datasets. Pointwise error is reduced by 23 (m/z). Compared with Xcalibur, our statistical agglomeration algorithm produces 68 less m/z error and 51 less intensity error on average on two comparable datasets. Availability: The source code for Statistical Agglomeration and the datasets used are freely available for non-commercial purposes at https://github.com/optimusmoose/statistical_agglomeration. Modified Bin Aggolmeration is freely available in MSpire, an open source mass spectrometry package at https://github.com/princelab/mspire/.Direct infusion (injection) lipidomics, sometimes called shotgun lipidomics for its similarity to shotgun genomics, is an emerging but a well-studied field . Here, a liquid sample is injected into a mass spectrometer, yielding a set of [mass/charge (m/z), intensity, retention time (RT)] 3-tuples . For our purposes, we define a data point as a single m/z and intensity observation of a given isotope at a particular RT and a peak as the data points that comprise the observation of a distinct isotope. (Hereafter, we will more accurately use the term ridge instead of peak because of the fact that direct injection lipid intensity does not vary as a function of time.) Because there is no chromatographic separation in direct infusion lipidomics, each RT scan represents an independent measurement of the sample. Ideally, the species in the sample would be uniformly distributed across RT and measured in near-identical intensities across RT, making reduction to a single 2D vector of unique ridges trivial. Unfortunately, there are several noise factors that appear in real-world direct infusion samples. Sample distribution heterogeneity results in inter-scan variance in both m/z and intensity. What is more, technical and mechanical limitations in the mass spectrometer inculcate even more error into the output. Accurately estimating the true ridge values from the resulting output file is a non-trivial challenge . To identify and quantify each lipid, its component ridges must somehow be isolated one from another, and the additive noise ridges removed. We will call this process ridge summarization. Only after ridge summarization can the isotopic envelopes be compared with theoretical databases to identify and quantify the individual lipids in the sample. The necessity of a solution for the ridge summarization problem in every direct infusion lipidomics application and the presumed effect of the results of such a solution on downstream quantitation would suggest that a description of ridge summarization be found in every shotgun lipidomics study . However, it is frequently left unmentioned (e.g.). Although direct infusion methods have been around since the mid-1990s, we are only aware of two published solutions to this segment of the quantitation pipeline. The first is that of treating a survey scan as a true ridge measurement . From a glance at a typical shotgun lipidomics plot, it should be clear that treating any single RT scan of data as a representative set of true ridges would be less than ideal, as the scan would include many ridges with incorrect m/z and intensity and exclude many other true ridges . The second, a more robust approach, applies to shotgun lipidomics a technique that has been used in several proteomics studies . This approach, which we label the fixed-width algorithm, averages scans across the RT dimension to yield an estimation of the true contents of the sample . Though this approach is simple to code and runs in linear time, it is nonstatistical and does not take into account the data densities along the m/z axis. Here, we present two statistical approaches to solving the ridge summarization problem and evaluate them against both synthetic and real-world ridge summarization problems. We also provide the first comparative performance analysis of Xcalibur and the fixed-width algorithm on the ridge summarization problem. To whom correspondence should be addressed.SA generally outperforms the other methods under consideration across all datasets on both the qualitative and quantitative measures considered in this study. SA and MBA outperform all other methods on NTPD m/z . MBA had a slightly lower NTPD rate on Sample_3_750-800, whereas SA outperformed all other methods) are sliced into bins of width resolution 10 7. The colors delineate observed ridges. The red segments along the x-axis indicate bin boundaries. See online version for color on the other two datasets. The relative performance was identical for NTPD intensity, with the exception being more disparity between the SA and MBA scores and fixed width on the Noyce dataset . Xcalburs NTPD is dramatically higher for both NTPD intensity and NTPD m/z than all other methods on the two datasets that were comparable given Xcaliburs proprietary data limitations. SA predicted the number of ridges far more accurately than any other method tested, including Xcalibur, which was furthest from the actual number of ridges . MBA was second best on average at predicting the correct number of ridges. On average, each of the three methods performs rather similarly on purity. The scores averaged across all three datasets are 0.73, 0.7 and 0.74 for SA, MBA and Fixed Width respectively (Supplementary Material). Because we are ignoring all noise points (real or assigned), and because Fixed Width produces the narrowest ridges, it is not surprising that Fixed Width performed so well on purity.The NMI scores averaged across all three datasets are 0.95, 0.96 and 0.93 for SA, MBA and Fixed Width, respectively (Supplementary Material). It is surprising that they are so close, but this is likely a result of the modifications to this metric to handle noise. Each of the three methods performs inconsistently on SSE. SA outperforms the other methods on both Sample 3 datasets for m/ z SSE, but MBA has a dramatically lower SSE for the Noyce dataset than either of the other methods . Fixed Width has a dramatically lower intensity SSE than either of the other methods on the Noyce dataset, but only slightly less SSE than SA on the Sample_3_750-800 dataset (Supplementary Material). MBA noticeably outperforms other methods on the Sample_3_1000-1050 dataset. Although the aforementioned metrics should give an overall quantitative measure of the performance of each method, the segments of the spectra in Figures 12 and 13 provide a qualitativeXcalibur only accepts data in its proprietary format, the results are not available for the Noyce dataset. Note the different scales. See online version for color. See online version for color. NTPDIntensity. Here we compare predicted ridge intensities to the nearest observed ridge for each of the four methods (Statistical Agglomeration, Modified Bin Agglomeration and Fixed Width) using the (a) Noyce, (b) Sample_3_750-800 and (c) Sample_3_1000-1050 datasets. SA outperforms the other methods on average, providing a 51 error reduction from Xcalibur for the two measurable datasets given Xcaliburs proprietary data restrictions. SA provides a 44 reduction on average over Fixed Width. Note the different scales. See online version for color. SA bin agglomeration. After sorting the data by m/z value, and assigning data points to bins of fixed width, a t-test is conducted on the intensity and m/z means of the first two bins (a). If either of the t-tests fails to show a high confidence that the means are different, the bins are not combined and the algorithm considers the next two bins for agglomeration (b). Otherwise, the two bins are agglomerated, and the algorithm considers the agglomerated bin and the next bin for agglomeration (c). Dotted lines indicate ridge boundaries. See online version for color assessment of each method on the Sample 3 datasets (Supplementary Material for quantitative results for the Noyce dataset). The pattern that emerges across datasets is that, at least on these random segments, SA consistently summarizes ridges exactly or very close to the hand annotation. MBA also performs well. Fixed Width is not consistent in performance but usually adds extra ridges and/or shifts m/z values of ridges substantially. Across both Sample 3 datasets, Xcalibur drastically increases the number of ridges in the segment. Xcaliburs predicted ridges are also notably less intense than the hand-annotated dataset. The Supplementary information provides more metric results and an in-depth discussion of how noise is treated in this article.Fixed Width, to our knowledge the only extant algorithmic solution to this problem, is simple to code, yet has some obvious limitations. In mass spectrometry, the intra-sample resolution is inherently variable . At least for the Orbitrap, low-intensity signal groups are more dispersed, whereas high-intensity signal groups have less m/z variance. Any fixed-width solution will either chop low-intensity ridges into incorrect component ridges, incorrectly agglomerate highintensity ridges or both. As shown in the results, fixed-width methods significantly overestimate the number of ridges, cascading error downstream into identification and quantitation. MBA attempts to provide robust means for dealing with ridges that overlap, and builds on the idea of Fixed Width binning by agglomerating any adjacent non-empty bins. Although the initial fixed width and the choice of which bin splitting options to use are parameters that must be determined and set by the operator, the information in manufacturer specifications, such as resolution, should assist in deciding the MBA parameters. In practice, the machine calibration to which the specifications are tied is not always the setup desired for the practitioner due to time requirements, desire to use MS/MS and so forth. Also, the true machine resolution can vary widely outside of the m/z value the specification is provided for. However, practical experience may assist in knowing when the manufacturer specs are sufficient and what changes need to be made when they are not. Because each ridge can be a different width, SA addresses the problem of bin size in a flexible data-driven manner. The ridge agglomeration procedure is statistically driven using the data itself, handling problems like overlapping ridges and avoiding the need for users to set parameters or for a priori knowledge about the dataset. Noise filtering allows for the avoidance of boundary conditions found in fixed-width methods such as ridges with just one data point. We consider s/n 1 to be a useful a priori setting, as it was the ideal setting across all three of our datasets. SAs ability to predict a far more accurate number of ridges than the other methods suggests it will increase accuracy in downstream processes over the current methods used, including Xcalibur . One troubling observation from this study is the difficulty in accurately assessing intensity of discovered ridges. Both species identification and quantitation require an accurate intensity measurement. Yet, even SAs performance is simply the best of several inaccurate methods. Given the amount of lipid quantitation performed currently, and also the state-of-the-art, better methods of estimating intensity are needed. We have described the need for accurate ridge summarization in direct injection lipidomics samples. Interestingly, despite the importance of accuracy in this first step of the analysis pipeline, there has been no study of solutions to this version of the ridgesummarization problem to our knowledge. We present our estimate of what is currently done in the community and also propose two novel algorithms, MBA and SA, for resolving ridges in shotgun lipidomics samples. We show that SA outperforms open source and proprietary methods on average in a measure of ridgewise error, NTPD, on three datasets. We also show that SA significantly outperforms the proprietary program Xcalibur on the two datasets for which we could use Xcalibur. Incorporation of SA into existing analysis pipelines could drastically improve downstream quantitation and identification results in a variety of lipidomics experiments. Future work should continue improving our capacity to produce summarized ridges that more accurately estimate intensity. In light of the recent calls for greater reproducibility in mass spectrometry , and to foster development of improved algorithms, these datasets and the SA algorithm (with ample documentation) are available freely for non-commercial use at http://github.com/optimusmoose/statistical_agglomeration. 
