Statistical analysis of the cancer cell's molecular entropy using high-throughput data Motivation: As cancer progresses, DNA copy number aberrations accumulate and the genomic entropy (chromosomal disorganization) increases. For this surge to have any oncogenetic effect, it should (to some extent) be reflected at other molecular levels of the cancer cell, in particular that of the transcriptome. Such a coincidence of cancer progression and the propagation of an entropy increase through the molecular levels of the cancer cell would enhance the understanding of cancer evolution. Results: A statistical argument reveals that (under some assumptions) an entropy increase in one random variable (DNA copy number) leads to an entropy increase in another (gene expression). Statistical methodology is provided to investigate the relation between the genomic and transcriptomic entropy using high-throughput data. Analyses of multiple high-throughput datasets using this methodology show a close, concordant relation among the genomic and transcriptomic entropy. Hence, as cancer evolves, and the genomic entropy increases, the transcriptomic entropy is also expected to surge.DNA copy number aberrations are one of the key characteristics of cancer . In fact, the accumulation of DNA copy number aberrations is the most consistent feature of cancer progression . The entropy at the genomic level (chromosomal disorganization) of cancer cells thus exceeds that of healthy cells and tends to surge as cancer progresses. DNA copy number aberrations affect mRNA expression levels as the central dogma of molecular biology suggests and numerous high-throughput studies have shown (e.g.). Aberrations need not only affect the expression of its driver gene, but may also alter expression levels of the other genes that map to the aberrated segment . In fact, genomic aberrations also affect expression levels of other transcripts like microRNAs (e.g.). The close relation between the genome To whom correspondence should be addressed. and transcriptome suggests that the entropy increase spreads to other molecular levels of the cells regulatory system, and is expected to manifest itself most prominently in the transcriptome. Indeed, for this surge in genomic entropy to have any phenotypic (oncogenetic) effect, it needs (to some extent) to propagate to the transcriptomic level and beyond. Cancer may be considered an evolutionary process, driven by random variation and natural selection . During its life a cell may undergo heritable genetic alterations (e.g. DNA copy number aberrations). Such alterations may be neutral but may also affect the cells phenotype. Irrespective of the type of alteration, any cell is subject to natural selection: it has to survive in the environment of the organisms tissue. Within this framework, a cancer cell can be thought of as having acquired alterations that resulted in beneficial traits to survive, proliferate and metastasize . Evolution explores different paths via random variation, and the path that leads to a faster entropy increase is naturally selected . As cancer evolves/progresses, the entropy at the genomic level increases . Here we investigate, using high-throughput studies, whether this is reflected at the transcriptomic level (as suggested by). If so, this may shed light on the path of evolution of the cancer cell. Before we facilitate the study of the propagation of increased entropy of genome to transcriptome in the cancer cell, we first provide a statistical argument that suggests this indeed seems plausible. We then present statistical methodology to analyze highthroughput genomic experiments in order to answer the following related questions: @BULLET Is the entropy of a cancer samples transcriptome higher than that of a normal sample?@BULLET Is a cancer samples genomic entropy associated to that of its transcriptome?These questions are portrayed schematically in. We illustrate how the discussed methodology may be utilized by application to multiple datasets.We provide statistical motivations for the hypothesis that an increase of the entropy at the genomic level leads to an increase of the entropy at the):For our first motivation, we assume that DNA copy number and gene expression are both measured without error and their relation at any loci may be described by a strict monotone increasing function g:In addition, we note that, according to Theorem 1 of Ramsay (1998), any smooth monotone function g(x) may be represented as:where c 0 and c 1 are constants and w is a coefficient function that isTo show that H(g, we first note that the entropies of X 1 and g(X 1 ) are linked via:It thus suffices to show that:In case g is a linear map, g(x) = ax, this is immediate. To prove the desired inequality for other choices of g, we note that, appealing to Representation (1), the original inequality follows if we prove:Integration by parts yields:the expression levels of two genes that map to these loci. Furthermore, assume that the relation between DNA copy number changes and gene expression at both loci may be described by Y = X + with X and independent, E(Y X) = X, and 0 to reflect the empirical observation that a(n) increase/decrease in DNA copy number leads to a(n) increase/decrease in gene expression. Theorem 1 then tells us that if locus 2 is more prone to be aberrated at the genomic level than locus 1 (statistically operationalized as X 1 disp X 2 ), this is reflected in the transcriptome (under the assumption of a simple linear model) and locus 2 will exhibit more abnormal expression levels than locus 1. Corollary 1 is formulated in terms of the dispersive ordering, whereas our interest is in the entropy ordering. The relevance of Theorem 1 stems from the fact that dispersive ordering implies entropy ordering, i.e. X 1 disp X 2 H(X 1 ) H(X 2 ) . Corollary 1 is illustrated for the entropy ordering by two examples. In the first, let), 1 N (0, 2 ) and 2 N (0, 2 ), all are independent. Then:, this difference is non-negative. In the second example, letCauchy(0, ) and 2 Cauchy(0, ), all are independent. Then, using a result from Blyth (1986):, this difference is non-negative.Analysis results depend to some extent on the normalization method applied. It may therefore be argued that we should have preprocessed the data with more than one normalization method. In fact, we analyzed two different preprocessed version of the Singh dataset (Type II), one preprocessed by the RMA approach ofand the other by the MAS approach of Affymetrix. This yielded comparable significant P-values. In addition, we re-analyzed the Chitale dataset (Type I) with segmented (instead of normalized) DNA copy number data, also leading to identical results. For other datasets (when preprocessed differently, we expect similarly consistent analysis results. Perhaps more convincing, is the fact that, e.g. an entropy difference among normal and cancer is observed over many datasets, involving many different tissue types, generated on various platforms and preprocessed with a diverse array of normalization methods. This despite the fact that normalization aims to remove differences between hybridizations, and is thus likely to obscure (at least partially) the entropy signal. In addition, results are, within tissue type, consistent over datasets (for Type II experiments, the prostate cancer datasets Chandran, Kim and Singh reveal concordant results; for Type I experiments, the results of the breast cancer datasets Bergamaschi, Pollack and Zhang all agree). In future, the data analyzed here (DNA copy number and gene expression data) will be generated by means of massive parallel sequencing (MPS). Apart from the improved resolution, such data will be less noisy and normalization is expected to be less of a nuisance for entropy comparison.We provided a motivating statistical argument which suggests that an increase in genomic entropy is reflected in the transcriptome. Statistical methodology that facilitates the investigation of this hypothesis through analysis of high-throughput DNA copy number and gene expression data is presented. The methodology is illustrated on a multitude of datasets from cancers of various tissues. In addition, the results from analyses of these data suggest that the hypothesis of a related genomic and transcriptomic entropy in cancer has more than only face value. 
