Statistical distribution of amino acid sequences: a proof of Darwinian evolution Motivation: The article presents results of the listing of the quantity of amino acids, dipeptides and tripeptides for all proteins available in the UNIPROTTREMBL database and the listing for selected species and enzymes. UNIPROTTREMBL contains protein sequences associated with computationally generated annotations and large-scale functional characterization. Due to the distinct metabolic pathways of amino acid syntheses and their physicochemical properties, the quantities of subpeptides in proteins vary. We have proved that the distribution of amino acids, dipeptides and tripeptides is statistical which confirms that the evolutionary biodiversity development model is subject to the theory of independent events. It seems interesting that certain short peptide combinations occur relatively rarely or even not at all. First, it confirms the Darwinian theory of evolution and second, it opens up opportunities for designing pharmaceuticals among rarely represented short peptide combinations. Furthermore, an innovative approach to the mass analysis of bioinformatic data is presented.According to the theory of independent events , the change of an observed quantity with respect to the reference quantity is proportional to the observed quantity. The theory is reflected for example in thermal conductivity, statistical thermodynamics, chemical kinetics and the LambertBeer law. In mathematical terms, this means logarithmic decay of the observed quantity, dx. In our computational experiment, the distribution of dipeptides and tripeptides represented in the TREMBL database is logarithmic with the regression coefficient R 2 higher than 0.9. The percentage correlation between the theoretical number of di- and tripeptides and values calculated using the programme shows a linear relation with the regression coefficient R 2 higher than 0.9. The theoretical number of di-and tripeptides was calculated from the formula:Page: 2935 29332935where: AApercentage amino acid content in the whole TREMBL database , nAAtheoretical content of a dipeptide (n = 2) or a tripeptide (n = 3). The major reason for the discrepancy of correlation between the theoretically calculated number of di-or tripeptides is that a lot of sequences with unknown amino acids (X or Alx B and Glx Z), not included in the analysis, occur in the UNIPROTTREMBL database. The programme deletes all di-or tripeptides which contain X, B or Z amino acids. Amino acid and di-and tripeptide counting was performed for selected species similar to that for the whole TREMBL database.6 shows amino acid, di-and tripeptide distribution for H.sapiens and its selected enzymes. The distribution for the other species from the Table is available in the Supplemental Material. When the TREMBL database is divided into species and enzyme classes, amino acid distribution close to theoretical number is obtained. It is noted that amino acid content in a species decreases with the length of its biosynthesis pathway. Due to this, certain sequences occur more frequently, while other very rarely or not at all. A number of natural toxins, metabolites and protein inhibitors are composed of polypeptides or their natural modifications. It can be then argued that processed and highly hydrolyzed food was the first source of inhibitors and natural medicines which protected species against fungi, bacteria and viruses. Many authors claim that food processing (heat treatment) contributed to the rapid brain development . 
