Structural bioinformatics STRIKE: evaluation of protein MSAs using a single 3D structure Motivation: Evaluating alternative multiple protein sequence alignments is an important unsolved problem in Biology. The most accurate way of doing this is to use structural information. Unfortunately, most methods require at least two structures to be embedded in the alignment, a condition rarely met when dealing with standard datasets. Result: We developed STRIKE, a method that determines the relative accuracy of two alternative alignments of the same sequences using a single structure. We validated our methodology on three commonly used reference datasets (BAliBASE, Homestrad and Prefab). Given two alignments, STRIKE manages to identify the most accurate one in 70 of the cases on average. This figure increases to 79 when considering very challenging datasets like the RV11 category of BAliBASE. This discrimination capacity is significantly higher than that reported for other metrics such as Contact Accepted mutation or Blosum. We show that this increased performance results both from a refined definition of the contacts and from the use of an improved contact substitution score. Contact: cedric.notredame@crg.eu Availability: STRIKE is an open source freeware available fromThe assembly of accurate multiple sequence alignments (MSAs) is one of the most important tasks in Biology. Judging from citation index, MSA packages have become the most widely used tools for biological sequence modeling. This should not come as a surprise given their wide range of applications that include phylogenetic tree reconstruction, profile building and structural modeling. These diverse modeling schemes are becoming increasingly important in defining the way experimental information is being transferred across uncharacterized sequences. Yet, trees, profiles and structural models all have one thing in common: their strong dependency on the MSA framework they are based upon. For instance, it is well established that homology modeling is very dependent on MSA accuracy . In a similar fashion,have recently described the To whom correspondence should be addressed. influence of MSAs onto phylogenetic tree topologies, showing how minor variations across different aligners can lead to significantly different tree topologies. Albeit these authors have not formally established a direct dependency between MSA accuracy and proper phylogenetic tree reconstruction, they have nonetheless shown the existence of a strong methodological bias induced by the aligners choice. More recently, Markovahave used a different set up to show how the use of different aligners can result in significantly different estimates for positive selection rates. These observations confront biologists with a complex situation. On the one hand, it is clear that the choice of an alignment strategy will have an impact on any result drawn upon the MSAs; on the other hand, there is no simple way to quantify this impact and determine its positive or negative nature. Using sequence information alone, it is very hard to decide which one is the best among two or more alternative MSAs of the same sequences. This difficulty stems from the impossibility of accurately aligning proteins with 25 sequence identity using sequence information only. Sequence similarity is only a useful indicator of alignment accuracy for closely related sequences. The most biologically relevant alignment (defined with respect to structural information in standard datasets) is rarely the one having the highest possible score . The practical consequences of these observations are important as they imply the need for external evaluation criteria in order to evaluate MSAs in a biologically meaningful way. The problem of estimating the biological relevance of an alignment is particularly acute considering alternative MSA methods. As shown in M-Coffee , different packages tend to deliver significantly different MSAs. Most scientists address this problem by ignoring it and using a single aligner [most frequently ClustalW (. However, for those ready to consider the aligner as yet another parameter in a complex modeling pipeline, at least two sequencebased solutions exist. The first one involves combining all the alternative alignments into one unique consensus MSA. This approach has been shown to improve slightly on all the combined methods . Along the same lines, it has also been shown that regions showing a high agreement across methods are also more likely to be correctly aligned, as estimated by comparison with a reference MSA . The second approach is to evaluate the alignment for specific features difficult to take into account while building the MSA, but measurable on a complete model (e.g. completely conserved positions) . The AlexSys strategy is built on this approach and combines features measured on the unaligned sequences (length, divergence, etc.) to determineOur first task was to determine which type of contact yields the most informative log-odds substitution matrix: for this we checked the MCMC, SCSC and ALLALL contacts. We determined the corresponding matrix values on the ASTRAL subset and measured the entropy of the resulting matrix. As one would expect, the side chain contacts are those yielding the most informative matrix. Indeed, while the MCMC matrix has an entropy of 0.06 and the ALLALL has an entropy of 0.12, the SCSC reaches 0.46. This value is in the same range as that reported byfor the Blosum45 (0.4) and Blosum62 (0.7) matrix. In order to assess the statistical significance of this value, we generated 1000 random matrices and found their entropies to be distributed normally, with mean entropy of 2.710 4 and a SD of 3.810 5. Altogether these results suggest that the SCSC matrix (named STRIKE matrix in the rest of this text) has all the desirable properties for evaluating the conservation of contacts in MSAs. These finding is in agreement with previous results where it is shown that main chain contacts are less informative for the task of discriminating correct 3D predicted models from incorrect ones if the decoys are based on templates sharing structural motifs with the native structure. MC atoms mainly contribute to the stabilization of secondary structure elements and therefore constitute energetically favorable components of the fold. In the context of STRIKE, MCMC connections disturb the signal because they increase the frequency of contacts between residues not sharing the adequate physicochemical properties for an interaction. As one can see in, the STRIKE matrix recapitulates quite well the bestknown properties of protein structures. For instance, the entry with the highest score is the cysteincystein interaction, an observation that is in good agreement with the well-established importance of disulfide bridges. Likewise, contacts between hydrophobic residues interactions tend to have positive values, whereas contacts between charged residues with the same sign (+1 or 1) have a clear negative trend. The interactions between amino acids with opposite charges are only slightly positive, as one would expect given the tendency of these residues to interact with the solvent rather than forming salt bridges within the hydrophobic core. Only glycine contacts remained undetermined, owing to the lack of a side chain. The corresponding entries were set to 0. It is interesting to note that the matrix is slightly asymmetric. This reflects the underlying asymmetry of residueresidue interactions along the peptide chain. Indeed, the contacts are determined in Nter Cter direction and can therefore not be assumed to be reversible. The most asymmetric entry is the prolinetryptophan interaction, with P W = 5 and W P = 7. Aside from this extreme observation, most of the other values have limited variation when comparing the Nter Cter with the Cter Nter entry. Our next task was to estimate whether the STRIKE method is suited to discriminate between accurate and less accurate sequence alignments (accuracy being defined with respect to the reference alignment). For this purpose, we estimated the correlation between the reference score (RS, as produced by the BAliBASE3 program BaliScore) and the normalized STRIKE score (see Section 2 for details). For each dataset, a STRIKE score was computedindependently for each structure and its related sequences (i.e. one sequence with known structure was used as a template while others were considered as targets). The result is displayed in. The resulting correlation with a Pearsons coefficient of r = 0.54 (Spearmans rho = 0.51) is very weak. Nonetheless, the graph suggests the existence of a trend in the relation between structure-based accuracy estimates and STRIKE scores. Our goal was not so much to estimate the MSA accuracy in absolute terms, but rather to tell apart two or more alternative alignments of the same structure/sequence pair. For that purpose, we were therefore more concerned with the existence of a nonparametric correlation allowing such comparisons. A non-parametric correlation exists whenever the relation of order defined between two observations is similar across the two considered metrics. For instance, if the reference score indicates that a T-Coffee MSA is more accurate than its ClustalW counterpart, the relation of order is conserved if the STRIKE score of the T-Coffee MSA is superior to the ClustalW MSA STRIKE score. In order to estimate the existence of such a non-parametric correlation, we computed alternative alignments of each available dataset using seven methods: ClustalW , Mafft , Muscle , PCMA , POA , Probcons and T-Coffee . We also included the reference alignments themselves, and treated them as an eighth additional method. We then computed the RS for each MSA, using the evaluation package suitable for the considered reference dataset resulting in a single accuracy score for each MSA. Using the same alignments, we evaluated the scores we wanted to test, including a Blosum62 sums-of-pairs, a Pam250 sums-of-pairs, the CAO score (one for each structure) and the STRIKE score. Given any of these datasets and two alternative alignments generated with two different methods, we plotted the difference in RS versus the difference in the test score. The results obtained on the RV11 component of the BAliBASE 3 data when comparing the difference in RS with the difference in STRIKE scores are shown in. In this graph, each point corresponds to one dataset, aligned with two different aligners.The horizontal axis indicates the difference of RS between the two MSAs while the vertical axis represents the difference in STRIKE score (considering the same template structure). The total number of points is therefore a product of the number of datasets, the number of structures they contain and the number of possible pairwise method comparisons. As suggested by, the absolute correlation between these differences is relatively weak. Nonetheless, observations made insuggest a very strong non-parametric correlation. Indeed, the two quadrants corresponding to RS differences and STRIKE differences having the same sign contain the most data points (top right and bottom left quadrant). In total, a significant proportion of 79 of the points fall into these quadrants. Note that the striped patterns that can be seen on this graph result from the same MSA being evaluated several times for its STRIKE score (once for each structure it contains). By definition, the reference alignments (red squares) always have the highest accuracy and it is interesting to note that a vast majority of these reference alignments are in the proper quadrants of the graph. A graph like the one shown oncan be summarized with an estimate of the fraction of measures falling within the two correct quadrants. We therefore repeated the same analysis on the whole BAliBASE3, Prefab3 and Homstrad databases in order to compare the effect of using different metrics like sequencebased measures (PAM and Blosum) or CAO. The results are summarized in. It is interesting to note that these results are in broad agreement across the three datasets. As one would expect, the sequence-based measures (PAM and Blosum) have a limited capacity of discriminating MSAs for their structural accuracy. Overall, using them to rank two alignments is only slightly more accurate than flipping a coin (5055). Surprisingly, the CAO-based metrics is not significantly more informative than a direct sequence analysis. This surprising result is most likely a consequence of the underdetermination of the CAO substitution matrices. The last column summarizes the tests carried out with STRIKE. It shows that in this context, our approach yields the best results. On the most challenging dataset (RV11, made of distantly related sequences with a known 3D structure), the discrimination capacity of STRIKE is 79. On the rest of the datasets, this capacity ranges from 65The number of comparison ( comp.) is much higher for the structural measurements because a score can be computed for each structure included.to 70, a significant improvement over the alternative methods considered here. Interestingly, this discriminative capacity seems to be independent of the nature of the considered proteins and the performances are relatively even when considering most structural subclasses . Categories with 50 members were excluded. When using a method like STRIKE to estimate the relative accuracy of two MSAs, it is important to have a notion of howmeaningful the score may be and whether it might be influenced by the level of sequence identity in the considered dataset. We therefore binned the results of the analysis presented inaccording to the average level of sequence identity in the considered MSAs (as estimated on the reference). Results are displayed in, where the color code indicates the fraction of residues appearing in the correct quadrants. The P-values were computed using a two-sided binomial test with P 0 = 0.5. Given two alignments and a difference in STRIKE score, this figure gives an estimate of how much trust one can have that the STRIKE difference reflects the difference in structural accuracy. The strongest trend on this graph is the poor level of information provided by STRIKE score differences 0.25. It seems one can rarely use this level of difference to effectively distinguish between two alternative alignments. Above this value, if we ignore the situations with 100 counts, the level of information provided by a difference in STRIKE score is roughly constant across all ranges of identity. With sequences within the twilight zone (2030), differences of STRIKE score 0.5 make it possible to identify the most accurate MSA in nearly 90 of the cases. On our datasets, such discrimination can be carried out on a significant fraction of the data. The reason why our approach is much more informative than CAO is not entirely clear. There are two main differences between our method and CAO. First, our metric evaluates contacts rather than the conservation of contacts. Second, the STRIKE matrix was determined using all-atom contacts instead of coarse-grained C spheres as in CAO. We therefore determined an additional STRIKE matrix using the coarse-grained side chain contacts of CAO instead of the all-atom STRIKE contacts . The resulting matrix has an entropy 0.3 and when tested on Homestrad, it was only able to correctly classify 52 of the alignments. While this figure is higher than that of CAO itself (46), it is also significantly lower than the original STRIKE matrix whose improved performances are therefore quite likely to be a combination of better contact estimation complemented with a larger amount of usable information.In this work, we present the STRIKE score, a new metric using a single structure to estimate the structural correctness of MSAs. We show that using STRIKE, one can distinguish between alternative MSAs of the same sequences more reliably than when using similarity based scoring schemes, like Blosum or PAM. STRIKE is not the first attempt to compare alternative MSAs using the information from a single sequence, and in this work we have extensively compared our approach with that developed in CAO, which is conceptually similar albeit more complex in its implementation. Our results suggest that comparisons based on STRIKE result are more likely to reveal the most trustworthy MSA than those using CAO. Two reasons explain this difference. First, the STRIKE matrix is not estimated on structural alignments but on single structures. Consequently, the STRIKE matrix could be estimated on a much larger reference dataset. In comparison, the CAO matrix that considers the substitution cost for every contact pair of amino acids was probably underdetermined. The second reason for the reported improvement is the all-atom definition of contacts. While CAO was determined using coarse-grained C side chain contacts, STRIKE uses a more sophisticated definition of contacts discriminating between side chains and backbone. We showed that this choice accounts for the largest part of the difference between CAO and STRIKE. We also explored the factors influencing STRIKEs capacity to discriminate between accurate and inaccurate MSAs. Against our expectation, we found the protein class to have only a weak influence on the trustworthiness of STRIKE. On the datasets analyzed here, the variations between all , all and structures are 5 percentage points. We found that the differences in STRIKE scores are most useful when considering datasets with low average identity, and unsurprisingly when the difference in the scores is high. For instance, a STRIKE difference of 1 nat on a dataset with 30 average sequence identity makes it possible to identify with a reliability close to 90 the most correct of the two considered. This makes STRIKE a potentially very useful tool to evaluate the alternative MSAs. Indeed, following the work ofon the uncertainty of phylogenetic trees, biologists are now confronted with a complex situation. On the one hand, it has now been established that alternative alignments can result in significantly different phylogenetic trees. On the other hand, no solution has yet been provided as to how biologists should proceed to select the most useful aligners or alignments. The method we introduce here could conveniently address this issue by providing users with an objective criterion to select the MSAs that are most likely to be structurally correct. Such a criterion would also be useful in the context of homology modeling. 
