Structure-based prediction of transcription factor binding specificity using an integrative energy function Transcription factors (TFs) regulate gene expression through binding to specific target DNA sites. Accurate annotation of transcription factor binding sites (TFBSs) at genome scale represents an essential step toward our understanding of gene regulation networks. In this article, we present a structure-based method for computational prediction of TFBSs using a novel, integrative energy (IE) function. The new energy function combines a multibody (MB) knowledge-based potential and two atomic energy terms (hydrogen bond and p interaction) that might not be accurately captured by the knowledge-based potential owing to the mean force nature and low count problem. We applied the new energy function to the TFBS prediction using a non-redundant dataset that consists of TFs from 12 different families. Our results show that the new IE function improves the prediction accuracy over the knowledge-based, statistical potentials, especially for homeodomain TFs, the second largest TF family in mammals.Transcription factors (TFs) regulate gene expression by interacting with specific DNA sequences called transcription factor binding sites (TFBSs) . Identification of TFBSs on a genomic scale, a crucial step in genomic annotation and in deciphering transcription regulatory networks, remains a great challenge in post-genomic bioinformatics. With the rapid increase of available genomic data, effective sequence-based methods for TFBS predictions have been developed . However, one issue of sequence-based methods is the high number of false-positive results, especially when the binding signal is weak or the TFs DNA-binding site is significantly different from the consensus sequence. Structure-based prediction methods, on the other hand, focus on proteinDNA interactions rather than sequence conservation. Therefore, they are not constrained by sequence information. These prediction methods mimic real binding and recognition events because specific binding between a TF and its binding sites in the cell relies on biophysical interactions. Whereas the sequence-based methods and experimental technologies can identify the genome binding site locations and binding site sequences, structure-based methods can also explain why and how these TFs bind at these locations and sequences. Moreover, understanding the mechanisms and effects of mutations on gene expression and diseases can guide rational design of therapeutic agents. Although research on protein DNA recognition began in the 1970s , structure-based methods for prediction of TFBSs were not developed until years ago when the high-resolution protein structures became available in the Protein Data Bank (PDB) . One of the major issues in structure-based TFBS prediction is the scoring function for evaluating binding affinity or binding energy between proteins and DNA. There are two major types of energy functions for studying proteinDNA interactions, the physics-based molecular mechanics force fields and the knowledge-based statistical potentials. Physics-based energy functions consist of physicochemical interactions including electrostatic interactions, van der Waals (VDW) forces, solvation energy and others . These physics-based potentials rely on approximations and often assume fixed charges. They have been applied to proteinDNA interaction studies with some success . Besides the general terms such as VDW and electrostatic interactions that include hydrogen bonds, p-cation and pp interactions have also been studied in proteinDNA recognition. It was previously thought that these interactions have a primary role in establishing the stability of the proteinDNA complexes, but new data suggest that these interactions may have a bigger role in proteinDNAWe applied the new IE function to the prediction of TFBSs using the non-redundant dataset of 29 TFDNA complex structures and compared the prediction with MB potential and DDNA3, a knowledgebased atomic-level proteinDNA interaction potential . Five examples of the predicted TF-binding motifs and the corresponding JASPAR motifs are shown in(all 29 predicted motifs are available in Supplementary). We also applied three different quantitative methods, Chi-square test, AKL divergence and Euclidean distance, to compare the prediction accuracy as described in Section 2. The lower the AKL divergence value, the more is the similarity between the predicted PWMs and JASPAR PWMs.shows the results based on AKL divergence to demonstrate the similarity between the predicted PWMs and the reference JASPAR PWMs. Results from the other two methods areProtein structure and function i309 consistent with the AKL divergence results (data not shown). As shown in, IE outperforms both MB and DDNA3 or at least one of them in the majority of the cases, for example, 1AM9:A and 1PUF:B. There are three cases where IE performs worse than MB and/or DDNA3, such as 1BF5:A and 2UZK:A. In several cases, the prediction accuracies are similar among all three energy functions, for example, 1DSZ:A. To check if the overall improvements are statistically significant, we performed Wilcoxon signed rank test to compare the predictions between IE and MB as well as between IE and DDNA3 based on the predicted similarity to JASPAR PWMs. The null hypothesis is that prediction accuracy of the IE method is equal or worse than the MB (or DDNA3) method, whereas the alternative hypothesis is that the prediction accuracy of the IE method is better than MB and DDNA3. The P-values for the three comparison metrics, Chisquare, AKL divergence and Euclidian distance are 0.003, 0.003 and 0.048 between IE and MB predictions and 0.003, 0.005 and 0.025 between IE and DDNA3, respectively, suggesting that the improvements are statistically significant. Zinc fingers and homeodomains represent the two largest and extensively studied TF families. In our non-redundant dataset, we found six zinc finger chains and three homeodomains . Zinc fingers usually function as a dimer or multimers. A single zinc finger domain typically contains three to four conserved recognition bases . Three of the six zinc finger cases (1LLM:C, 2DRP:A and 4F6M:A) show better binding site prediction using the IE function, whereas the other three have no significant differences (1DSZ:A, 4HN5:A and 4IQR:A, Figs 4 and 5). Homeodomains are the second largest TF family . Each homeodomain recognizes a variation of the typical TAAT core binding site. There were three homeodomains in the non-redundant dataset.shows the predicted binding motifs and significant improvement in prediction accuracy when using the IE function over the MB and DDNA3 statistical potentials. The quantitative improvement is shown in. In all three cases, predictions using the IE consistently outperform both MB and DDNA3 potentials. Homeodomain is a well-studied, highly conserved structural domain for DNA binding. As we have a relatively large number of high quality homeodomainDNA complex structures in the PDB and a large number of experimentally derived homeodomain binding motifs, we generated a larger dataset of homeodomains by combining the protein sequence similarity and binding site similarity asdescribed in Section 2.shows the predicted binding motifs using the IE (blue), MB (red) and DDNA3 (green) energy functions and their accuracy when compared with the JASPAR motifs. The data demonstrate that our new IE function can not only accurately predict the binding sites of homeodomains with low sequence identity , it can also accurately predict the binding sites of homeodomains with high sequence similarity but with different binding sites . We also used a recently developed IC-weighted PCC method to calculate the correctly predicted core-binding positions (PWM columns) in the homeodomain dataset. Persikov and Singh suggested that a reference column is correctly predicted if the IC-weighted PCC between the corresponding predicted and reference columns is at least 0.25 .shows that approximately 93 of the core base positions (44 columns) are correctly predicted by the IE function, 86 by the MB potential and 63 by the DDNA3 potential. The columns predicted by the IE function have a higher correlation to their corresponding JASPAR columns than the MB and DDNA3 energy functions.We report here improved accuracy of structure-based TF binding site prediction using an IE function. The IE function consists of the MB potential , and two atomic terms: hydrogen bond energy and p interaction energy. The MB energy is a residuelevel knowledge-based protein-DNA interaction potential derived from the mean force theory. Even though this MB potential implicitly captures biophysical interactions including hydrogen bonds and p interactions and showed its predictive power in both TF binding site prediction and protein-DNA docking studies , the mean force nature and the typical low count problem limit its ability to accurately capture the key hydrogen bond and p interactions. For example, arginine has the ability to form bidentate hydrogen bonds, which allows it to bind specifically to guanine because guanine has two hydrogen acceptors present in the major groove of DNA. Bidentate hydrogen bonds are considered key contributors to protein-DNA binding specificity . In the case of arginine and lysine, both can contribute to specific (through simple and complex hydrogen bonding) and non-specific (through electrostatic interactions) interactions; however, knowledge-based potentials cannot differentiate these two types of interactions. Therefore, adding explicit hydrogen bond terms can improve the accuracy of TFBS prediction by distinguishing hydrogen bonds that contribute to specificity from other interaction energies. We found that adding the explicit hydrogen bond term to the MB potential improves the TFBS prediction accuracy of 1B8I:B and 1IC8:A in the homeodomain dataset , as it captures the hydrogen bonds formed between arginine 258 and lysine 273, respectively, and the guanine of the conserved G:C base pair (and C).Protein structure and function i311 Aromatic residues can interact with DNA through p interactions . T-shaped p interaction with a base having partial positive charges in the major groove can contribute to binding specificity because of the variations of the electronic landscape of the bases in the major groove . However, these interactions are masked owing to the low count problem and the mean force nature in knowledge-based potentials. Adding an explicit p interaction term increases the accuracy of TFBS prediction. For example, the explicit p interaction term captures the p interaction formed between tyrosine 191 and the cytosine in the conserved G:C pair in 3RKQ:A , improving the TFBS prediction accuracy. This suggests that the partial positively charged atoms (large blue spheres in) of cytosine interact electrostatically with the partial negatively charged atoms (large red spheres in) in the aromatic ring of tyrosine 191, which may contribute to TFDNA binding specificity. The IE function shows an overall improvement in TFBS prediction over other knowledge-based potentials. However, in several cases in the multi-family dataset, the IE function does not perform as well as the MB and DDNA3 potentials . We investigated the complex structures and performed rigidity tests using FIRST and found that in those cases, the amino acids that interact with the DNA were from flexible regions or loops. For example, in the STAT1DNA complex (1BF5:A), the residues involved in interacting with DNA are on the loops . As discussed in the introduction, both hydrogen bonds and p interactions are high-resolution functions that are sensitive to conformational changes. For complex structures with highly flexible regions for DNA contacts, there is a large variation of interaction energies for different conformations of the complex and the structure used for prediction is just a snapshot of multiple possible conformations. In addition, if a TF structure is not in an ideal docked conformation and the amino acids do not have favorable torsion angles to achieve favorable bidentate hydrogen bonds with the DNA, then the sensitive physical energies may not help the prediction, which is the case in 1NLW:A and 2UZK:A. Future work will need to incorporate the flexibility information into the prediction process.We developed a novel IE function that consists of three components, a knowledge-based MB potential, a hydrogen bond energy function and an electrostatic potential for p interaction energy. We applied the new IE function to the prediction of TFBSs. The results show an overall improvement in binding site prediction, and there is a significant improvement in predicting binding sites of homeodomains when compared with the MB and DDNA3 potentials. The improved accuracy using the integrative function demonstrates the importance of considering hydrogen bonds and pinteractions explicitly in structure-based TFBS predictions, as they are not accurately captured by the knowledge-based potentials. 
