Genome analysis SVA: software for annotating and visualizing sequenced human genomes Here we present Sequence Variant Analyzer (SVA), a software tool that assigns a predicted biological function to variants identified in next-generation sequencing studies and provides a browser to visualize the variants in their genomic contexts. SVA also provides for flexible interaction with software implementing variant association tests allowing users to consider both the bioinformatic annotation of identified variants and the strength of their associations with studied traits. We illustrate the annotation features of SVA using two simple examples of sequenced genomes that harbor Mendelian mutations. Availability and implementation: Freely available on the web atRecent advances in next-generation sequencing (NGS) technologies have made it possible to search through entire genomes for variants that influence traits of interest . However, analyzing NGS data still requires addressing a number of considerable computational challenges. A variety of methods have been developed to firstly align the sequence reads , and secondly to identify the genetic variants . In this work, we focus on the downstream annotation necessary for the analysis of variants and provide simple means of visualizing variants in their genomic context using a built-in genome browser . One fundamental difference from the previous approach of using genome-wide association studies (GWAS) , is that many of the variants identified in NGS will be newly discovered. A second fundamental difference is that unlike GWAS data, sequence data, at least in principle, provides complete. A screenshot of SVA, highlighting a frameshift indel that is located on exon 14 of the Factor VIII gene and is the cause of type A hemophilia. information about the variation present in a genome. For both of these reasons, it is essential to develop a computational environment that can assess the likely functions of the variants observed, and whether or not they are present in existing variant databases. In most contexts, such functional assignments will need to be considered along with statistical association evidence in order to prioritize variants in terms of their likelihoods of influencing traits of interest. We also emphasize that in the early days of interpreting sequence data for complex traits, the sequence data itself will often not be sufficient to provide statistical confidence of association. Instead, the bioinformatic prioritization helps to point towards variants of interest that can be evaluated in much larger sample sets by direct genotyping. We have designed Sequence Variant Analyzer (SVA) to meet these challenges, and in this report, we use two examples to illustrate some of the annotation features.The SVA tool utilizes a knowledgebase of 8.9 GB, which is compiled and compressed into DVD ROM or can be downloaded from the SVA website. The main annotation functionality is performed locally and does not require an active internet connection. This tool has two distinct modules that allow analysis of the genomes included in a given project: the annotation module is used to determine genomic context and to predict the potential biological function of the identified variants (for example, synonymous or nonsynonymous, essential splice, etc.) in each genome. The results can then be visualized in SVAs built-in genome browser (visualization module). The annotated variants can also be exported to a separate statistical tool, for example ATAV (http://www.duke.edu/minhe/atav/), to assess their statistical associations with traits. Importantly, SVA is designed to conveniently connect its bioinformatic annotations with the statistical association tests so that users are allowed to consider them both and even suggestive association evidence may catch the users attention. There are also a number of integrated bioinformatic listing functions in SVA designed to help prioritize genetic variants. In broad overview, therefore, SVA inputs a set of identified variants for each genome, annotates them for possible functionality, and permits the user a variety of ways to visualize and filter the resulting data with relationship to phenotypic information. The basic principles of these core analyses are fairly simple, but the strength of these analyses is their ability to be seamlessly run across multiple genomes to prioritize all variants and genes at once. Two examples illustrate SVAs utility: To illustrate the simple annotation features of SVA we have analyzed the sequence data for subjects with two different Mendelian diseases. (1) Hemophilia A is an X-linked recessive disorder that is characterized by excessive bleeding due to improper clotting. Genetic mutations in the Factor VIII gene are known to cause Hemophilia A; therefore, it is possible to use this disease as a positive control. We annotated 10 case and 10 control genomes and found that the gene with the most cases harboring a rare mutation was Factor VIII (F8) . An SVA genome browser view of one of the identified indels is shown in. (2) Metachondromatosis (MC) is an autosomal dominant condition affecting bone growth. Our center performed a whole-genome sequencing of one MC patient, following a linkage analysis that implicated six candidate regions spanning a total of 42 MB. We took a three-step strategy: we first applied SVAs genomic region filter; we next applied SVAs novelty filters to identify variants that were absent in dbSNP and absent in all eight control genomes; and finally, we applied SVAs functional filters to identify proteintruncating variants. These filtering steps quickly identify an 11-bp frameshifting deletion on the PTPN11 gene as the cause, which was validated in a separate family . We note that for these simple cases no association tests are required (beyond rarity or absence in controls), whereas in the case of complex traits SVA would normally be used alongside a program like ATAV to facilitate the consideration of variants that are both annotated as functional and that show some degree of statistical association with trait values. 
