Sequence analysis svviz: a read viewer for validating structural variants Visualizing read alignments is the most effective way to validate candidate structural variants (SVs) with existing data. We present svviz, a sequencing read visualizer for SVs that sorts and displays only reads relevant to a candidate SV. svviz works by searching input bam(s) for potentially relevant reads, realigning them against the inferred sequence of the putative variant allele as well as the reference allele and identifying reads that match one allele better than the other. Separate views of the two alleles are then displayed in a scrollable web browser view, enabling a more intuitive visualization of each allele, compared with the single reference genome-based view common to most current read browsers. The browser view facilitates examining the evidence for or against a putative variant, estimating zygosity, visualizing affected genomic annotations and manual refinement of breakpoints. svviz supports data from most modern sequencing platforms. Availability and implementation: svviz is implemented in python and freely available from http:// svviz.github.io/.The human eye has an unparalleled ability to identify patterns from visual representations of data. Although the identification of mutations from high-throughput sequencing has been largely automated, visual inspection of putative variants using tools such as the integrative genomics viewer (IGV;) remains an important step in ensuring the quality and relevance of these variant calls. However, existing read visualizing tools such as IGV are largely constrained by a reference-genome-centric display model. Hence, point mutations can be represented easily as mismatched bases within sequencing data but more complex structural variants (SVs) including insertions, deletions, translocations and inversions are more difficult to parse visually against the linear reference genome sequence. Newer tools are able to represent short indels within sequencing data but do not help in representing larger SVs . Support for SVs can be displayed within IGV by highlighting reads with certain characteristics, including read-pairs mapping to distant regions of the genome or in unexpected orientations, or truncated alignments. However, it is difficult to identify from these highlighted, discordantly mapping reads whether they all agree with a putative variant, and if so, which variant. Furthermore, IGV relies on the quality and completeness of the alignments provided in input BAM files, which are produced en masse against a huge reference genome and hence may not optimally represent read support for a given variant. Finally, most existing viewers (a notable exception being TargetSeqView;) show all read data in the vicinity of a putative SV, making it difficult to discriminate reads supporting the SV, reads supporting the reference allele and reads that are not relevant to an SV. To overcome these limitations, we present svviz, a read visualizer for SVs that sorts and displays only reads relevant to thePublished by Oxford University Press 2015. This work is written by US Government employees and is in the public domain in the US. current SV. As with IGV, svviz only visualizes variants and does not identify them. svviz runs locally on a standard OS X or Linux desktop machine and requires as input read data, a reference genome and SVs. The flexible approach employed by svviz means it can display arbitrary SV types such as translocations, deletions and insertions, inversions and mobile-element insertions. Visualizations are rendered in scalable vector graphics (SVG), an open web standard graphics format, and shown in a locally hosted interactive web browser viewer or exported in publication-ready form. svviz supports read data in BAM format from any sequencing platform, including short-read [Illumina (] single-and paired-end as well as mate-pair or longer read [Pacific Biosciences , Oxford Nanopore or Illuminas synthetic long-reads] sequencing technologies. In batch mode, multiple SVs can be provided as input in the standard variant call format (VCF), producing summary statistics and PDF or SVG visualizations for hundreds or thousands of SVs with a single command. Annotations such as gene models or repeats can be shown relative to each allele.The Genome in a Bottle consortium has recently begun sequencing an Ashkenazi Jewish trio from the Personal Genome Project with a number of high-throughput sequencing platforms, providing a rich resource for identifying and validating variants using orthogonal experimental methods. SVs were called from Complete Genomics data for mother, father and son separately. From these variant calls, we randomly chose an 11.5 kb inversion on Chromosome 4 to visualize and validate using long mate-pair Illumina data. The visual representation is split into two sections. The top section shows reads supporting the alternate inversion allele, while the bottom section shows those supporting the reference allele. Each read is shown only once, relative to its assigned allele. For the alternate allele, mate-pair reads tile across the breakpoints in both parents, while no reads were found in the son. All three individuals show ample coverage of the reference allele breakpoints. The number of reads assigned by svviz to each allele suggests the son is homozygous reference and both parents are heterozygous for the inversion. Supplementaryshows the same data represented in IGV, with likely non-reference reads SonReads supporting the reference allele, with non-inverted region again shown in blue at bottom (but arrows pointing to the right). Red reads are on the minus strand and purple reads are on the plus strand, with gray lines linking mate-pairs (note that the mate-pair data shown here are sequenced in /+ orientation, and have an average insert size of $6.5 kb). Ambiguous reads, those unable to distinguish between the alleles, are not shown svvizcolored maroon and blue, suggestive of a SV but difficult to interpret as an inversion. Additional visualization examples are shown in the supplement: a putative 1200 bp deletion for which svviz shows very little supporting evidence, and which we thus estimate is a falsepositive (Supplementary); an inversion with PacBio reads spanning both breakpoints (Supplementary); svviz being used to refine imprecisely called breakpoints (Supplementary); a mobile-element insertion (Supplementary); a fusion gene present in a cancer sample but not the matched normal sample (Supplementary); a heterozygous deletion with reads in flanking regions shown to demonstrate the reduction in read coverage within the deletion (Supplementary) and a screenshot of the web view, zoomed in to show a single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) present only in the alternate allele (Supplementary). 
