SynaptomeDB: an ontology-based knowledgebase for synaptic genes Motivation: The synapse is integral to the function of the brain and may be an important source of dysfunction underlying many neuropsychiatric disorders. Consequently, it is an excellent candidate for large-scale genomic and proteomic study. However, while the tools and databases available for the annotation of high-throughput DNA and protein are generally robust, a comprehensive resource dedicated to the integration of information about the synapse is lacking. Results: We present an integrated database, called SynaptomeDB, to retrieve and annotate genes comprising the synaptome. These genes encode components of the synapse including neurotransmitters and their receptors, adhesion/cytoskeletal proteins, scaffold proteins, membrane transporters. SynaptomeDB integrates various and complex data sources for synaptic genes and proteins.The synapse is fundamental to the structure and function of the brain through its role in connecting neurons into circuits . As a result, the synapse is an excellent target of large-scale study of neuropsychiatric disorders. Over the past decade, the number of identified synaptic proteins has increased dramatically, creating a need for a comprehensive resource to integrate information about synaptic genes and proteins (the synaptome) from multiple heterogeneous sources. These genes encode components of the synapse including neurotransmitters and their receptors, adhesion/cytoskeletal proteins, scaffold proteins, transporters and others . Here, we report on an integrated database, SynaptomeDB, which provides a detailed and experimentally verified annotation of all known synaptic proteins. To whom correspondence should be addressed.The development of SynaptomeDB has been motivated by a desire to have a database that can interoperate with different resources by simply storing the object keys (database identifiers), some important attributes such as symbol and name, and the relationships among the objects. The database does not actually store large objects, like sequence records, but built-in web services can retrieve the subset of objects of interest on demand from other sources such as EBI and NCBI.We assembled a list of genes (n = 1886) that encode all known proteins of the synapse. This comprises 575 genes encoding proteins in the presynaptic nerve terminal and active zone, 107 from the synaptic vesicles and 1755 from the postsynaptic density (there is some overlap between categories). The list includes strong candidates for a number of neuropsychiatric disorders such as, for example, ANK3 for bipolar disorder , GRM7 for major depression , PDE4B for schizophrenia and SHANK3 for autism . SynaptomeDB is a database with a web front application resource that integrates the various and complex data sources for these synaptic genes. 
