Structural bioinformatics Tabhu: tools for antibody humanization Antibodies are rapidly becoming essential tools in the clinical practice, given their ability to recognize their cognate antigens with high specificity and affinity, and a high yield at reasonable costs in model animals. Unfortunately, when administered to human patients, xenogeneic antibodies can elicit unwanted and dangerous immuno-genic responses. Antibody humanization methods are designed to produce molecules with a better safety profile still maintaining their ability to bind the antigen. This can be accomplished by grafting the non-human regions determining the antigen specificity into a suitable human template. Unfortunately, this procedure may results in a partial or complete loss of affinity of the grafted molecule that can be restored by back-mutating some of the residues of human origin to the corresponding murine ones. This trial-and-error procedure is hard and involves expensive and time-consuming experiments. Here we present tools for antibody humanization (Tabhu) a web server for antibody humanization. Tabhu includes tools for human template selection, grafting, back-mutation evaluation, antibody modelling and structural analysis, helping the user in all the critical steps of the humanization experiment protocol.Monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) are an important class of therapeutic molecules. The high specificity and affinity towards their respective antigens, their modular structure that facilitates their engineering and the relative low costs for their production in model animals makes them excellent drug candidates against several diseases . However, together with all these desirable characteristics, xenogeneic mAbs have drawbacks that limit their therapeutic benefits and can ultimately endanger the patients health . To overcome these hurdles, different methods have been developed for increasing the mAbs degree of humanness by replacing parts of the original non-human antibody with the corresponding human counterparts. This process is generally referred as humanization and takes advantage of the particular architecture of the antibody molecule . The molecules generated by such humanization procedures may partially or completely lose affinity for their intended antigen; this can be usually restored by reintroducing specific and case-dependent native residues in the humanized molecule through an experimental trial-and-error procedure going under the name of back-mutation phase. Taking advantage of our experience in antibody sequence and structure analysis , we developed Tools for AntiBody Humanization (Tabhu), a comprehensive platform meant to help antibody humanization experiments. Tabhu integrates different methods to guide researchers through several steps of the humanization cycle, from the selection of a suitable human acceptor molecule to the evaluation of the back-mutations effect. 
