Tabix: fast retrieval of sequence features from generic TAB-delimited files Tabix is the first generic tool that indexes position sorted files in TAB-delimited formats such as GFF, BED, PSL, SAM and SQL export, and quickly retrieves features overlapping specified regions. Tabix features include few seek function calls per query, data compression with gzip compatibility and direct FTP/HTTP access. Tabix is implemented as a free command-line tool as well as a library in C, Java, Perl and Python. It is particularly useful for manually examining local genomic features on the command line and enables genome viewers to support huge data files and remote custom tracks over networks. Availability and Implementation: http://samtools.sourceforge.net.When we examine local genomic features on the command line or via a genome viewer, we frequently need to perform interval queries, retrieving features overlapping specified regions. We may read through the entire data file if we only perform interval queries a few times, or preload the file in memory if interval queries are frequently performed (e.g. by genome viewers). However, reading the entire file makes both strategies inefficient given huge datasets. A solution to the efficiency problem is to build a database for the data file , but this is not optimal, either, because generic database indexing algorithms are not specialized for biological data . The technical complexity of setting up databases and designing schemas also hampers the adoption of the database approach for an average end user. Under the circumstances, a few specialized binary formats including bigBed/bigWig and BAM have been developed very recently to achieve efficient random access to huge datasets while supporting data compression and remote file access, which greatly helps routine data processing and data visualization. At present, these advanced indexing techniques are only applied to BED, Wiggle and BAM. Nonetheless, as most TAB-delimited biological data formats (e.g. PSL, GFF, SAM, VCF and many UCSC database dumps) contain chromosomal positions, one can imagine that a generic tool that indexes for all these formats is feasible. And this tool is Tabix. In this article, I will explain the technical advances in Tabix indexing, describe the algorithm and evaluate its performance on biological data.The Tabix algorithm is implemented in C and Java with Perl and Python bindings to the C library. When the input file name is a URL starting with http:// or ftp://, Tabix will retrieve data directly from the remote file. The Tabix package is distributed under the MIT/X11 license, free to both academic and commercial uses. To evaluate the performance of Tabix, I applied it to two datasets: all human EST alignments and 40X short-read alignments . On both datasets, the bgzip compression reduces file sizes by a factor of 35 and Tabix only invokes one seek function call for each interval query. Tabix is slower on the short-read alignments because each 16 kb interval contains more data. Nonetheless, Tabix is still fast enough for a genome viewer. Data retrieval, especially retrieval over network, is I/O bounded rather than CPU bounded. Invoking fewer seek calls and reading fewer data from disk/network have a bigger impact on the practical performance. 
