TEtranscripts: a package for including transposable elements in differential expression analysis of RNA-seq datasets Motivation: Most RNA-seq data analysis software packages are not designed to handle the complexities involved in properly apportioning short sequencing reads to highly repetitive regions of the genome. These regions are often occupied by transposable elements (TEs), which make up between 20 and 80 of eukaryotic genomes. They can contribute a substantial portion of transcrip-tomic and genomic sequence reads, but are typically ignored in most analyses. Results: Here, we present a method and software package for including both gene-and TE-associated ambiguously mapped reads in differential expression analysis. Our method shows improved recovery of TE transcripts over other published expression analysis methods, in both synthetic data and qPCR/ NanoString-validated published datasets. Availability and implementation: The source code, associated GTF files for TE annotation, and testing data are freely available atTransposable elements are mobile DNA elements that constitute a large fraction of most eukaryotic genomes. These parasitic genetic elements propagate by multiplying within the genomes of host cells and can be passed from generation to generation through the germline lineage. Although the majority of TE copies are non-functional, a subset has retained the ability to transcribe and mobilize . Although retrotransposons require an RNA intermediate to transpose, both DNA and RNA transposons are transcribed from the genome, and they can accumulate in conditions such as cancer , neurodegenerative diseases , as well as during embryogenesis , neural development and aging . However, TE-associated reads are often discarded in sequencing data analyses because of the uncertainty in attributing ambiguously mapped reads to these regions, despite some previous attempts to integrate them in downstream analyses . Here, we present a program called TEtranscripts that allows users to analyze both gene-and TE-associated reads concurrently in one simplified workflow.To examine the accuracy and performance of TEtranscripts, we compared it with HTSeq-count version 0.5.4p3 , Cufflinks version v2.1.1 and RepEnrich on both synthetic and real data. HTSeq-count was chosen as a standard method that counts only uniquely mapped reads and is nearly identical to the uniq mode in TEtranscripts. Cufflinks was chosen as a popular method for gene abundance estimation that works from pre-mapped BAM files and includes options to handle multi-reads, but is not specifically designed for TEs. To the best of our knowledge, only one other published method has been designed for TE expression analysis from RNA-seq data, RepEnrich, but this method does not work with premapped BAM files. There is a recently published pipeline set piPipes to study piRNAs and TE-derived RNAs. Because it uses HTSeq-count and Cufflinks for quantification and Cuffdiff for differential analysis, we did not include comparisons to piPipes separately. For all comparisons, TE abundance measurements were given at the resolution of the element level (e.g. L1Md_A). For the synthetic datasets, accuracy was quantified as the proportion of abundances accurately recovered by each method for each TE element. For published datasets, accuracy was determined by agreement between the quantitative validation measurements (e.g. Q-PCR, NanoString) and the expression estimations computed by each software package.Transcripts derived from TEs form a small but important subset of all transcriptomic datasets. Often thought of as junk transcripts with little importance for biological phenotypes, TEs can play a large and unexpected role in important processes such as stem cell identity and reprogramming , and in human diseases . Although TE-derived transcripts should be included as part of standard expression analyses, there have previously been few tools that allow the easy inclusion of TE-associated reads. TEtranscripts allows users to simultaneously analyze geneand TE-derived transcripts in a simple expression analysis framework that works with aligned (BAM) files and annotation files (GTF). Using simulated reads as well as published datasets that include independent validations, we have shown that TEtranscripts outperforms all other published methods in abundance estimation, and concordance between statistical significance estimation and validated alterations in expression. In simulated datasets, we show that TEtranscripts performs particularly well at estimating the abundance of young TEs, which are more likely to be mobile and active in cells. In published datasets for both fly and mouse genomes, we show that alterations in TE expression estimated from RNA-seq data by TEtranscripts show better overall concordance with external validation data. TEtranscripts particularly outperforms other methods for complex mammalian genomes, such as the mouse, which has many more insertions per TE than flies, and a larger diversity in TE families. As with all approaches that quantify RNA expression from alignment data, TEtranscripts is highly dependent on the quality of the genomic alignment and annotation data (for genes and transposable elements). This is especially problematic when working with strains or cultivars whose DNA sequences and transposable element content have diverged significantly from the reference genome and annotations. TEtranscripts mitigates this limitation by providing flexibility in the input files provided by the user. Our software is agnostic to the genomic aligner and mapping parameters used to generate the input alignment files, as long as it complies with the SAM/BAM format. This enables users to optimize genome alignment parameters according to the characteristics of their experimental system before analysis with TEtranscripts. TEtranscripts can also utilize user-defined annotations for both gene and transposable elements during quantification. Although we have provided transposable element annotation files for a few common genomes, our software will process any TE annotations in the GTF format described earlier. These could include TE annotations that have been manually curated for a specific strain, or those identified by bioinformatics tools searching for de-novo transposable elements. This will allow users to provide the best annotation data suitable for their experiment, and maximizes the quality of analysis produced by TEtranscripts. 
