APTANI: a computational tool to select aptamers through sequence-structure motif analysis of HT-SELEX data Motivation: Aptamers are synthetic nucleic acid molecules that can bind biological targets in virtue of both their sequence and three-dimensional structure. Aptamers are selected using SELEX, Systematic Evolution of Ligands by EXponential enrichment, a technique that exploits aptamer-target binding affinity. The SELEX procedure, coupled with high-throughput sequencing (HT-SELEX), creates billions of random sequences capable of binding different epitopes on specific targets. Since this technique produces enormous amounts of data, computational analysis represents a critical step to screen and select the most biologically relevant sequences. Results: Here, we present APTANI, a computational tool to identify target-specific aptamers from HT-SELEX data and secondary structure information. APTANI builds on AptaMotif algorithm, originally implemented to analyze SELEX data; extends the applicability of AptaMotif to HT-SELEX data and introduces new functionalities, as the possibility to identify binding motifs, to cluster aptamer families or to compare output results from different HT-SELEX cycles. Tabular and graph-ical representations facilitate the downstream biological interpretation of results. Availability and implementation: APTANI is available at http://aptani.unimore.it.DNA or RNA aptamers are small oligonucleotides (100 nucleotides) that recognize their ligands with an affinity equal or superior to antibodies . These small molecules are not immunogenic, have a high capacity to penetrate tissues and can be easily modified to regulate their half-life or conjugated with drugs . Aptamers have entered the clinical pipeline with more than nine phase I and II ongoing clinical trials for diseases as macular degeneration, coronary artery bypass graft surgery and various types of cancer . Aptamers are selected in vitro by the use of an unsupervised iterative method called SELEX (Systematic Evolution of Ligands by ExponentialEnrichment), in which aptamers specific for a ligand are selected from an initial pool of random oligonucleotides using counter-selection and selection procedures. Historically, a SELEX experiment required multiple (15) rounds of selection with the undesirable effect of amplifying some intrinsic pitfalls, as e.g. the selection of polymerase chain reaction (PCR) artifacts. In recent years, the advent of high-throughput sequencing technologies revolutionized the SELEX technique, drastically reducing the number of cycles and, consequently, the possibility of generating artifacts. HT-SELEX (the SELEX procedure, coupled with high-throughput sequencing) boosted the use of SELEX technique to identify monoclonal aptamers against different epitopes of a ligand or of a whole cell.However, the quantity of data derived from a single HT-SELEX experiment requires the development of new computational tools to effectively identify aptamers with elevate binding proprieties. Considering that the binding affinity, of a specific aptamer toward its target, depends on the aptamer secondary structure , structural properties could be exploited to select those aptamers that more likely interact with a ligand. To date, even though interest in secondary structures is rising , most of the available algorithms and software that analyze HTSELEX data do not make use of any structural information but rely solely on the abundance (frequency) of the nucleotide sequences at the various cycles. To fulfill this gap, we developed APTANI a software package to select aptamers from HT-SELEX experiments using both sequence counts and structural motifs. APTANI builds on AptaMotif algorithm, originally implemented by Hoinka et al.(2012) to analyze SELEX data and extends its applicability to HTSELEX data. Additionally, APTANI, through the integrative analysis of frequency and secondary structure, allows to identify not only those aptamers with the highest binding probability but also their putative binding motifs. Finally, APTANI comprises some additional functionalities as the possibility to cluster aptamer families or to compare output results from different HT-SELEX cycles.To test APTANI performances and validate its findings, we analyzed a sequence library corresponding to an HT-SELEX experiment designed to isolate aptamers specific for murine IL4Ra . Briefly, epoxy beads conjugated with the extracellular domain of IL4Ra were used to screen a combinatorial random RNA library of approximately 10 14 aptamer species. Libraries from the PCR reaction of SELEX cycles 0, 1, 3, 5 and 11 were tagged in 5 and 3 with DNA tails containing the primers and tags for hybridization and control. Libraries were quantified via real-time PCR and bio-analyzer, admixed equally and sequenced with an Illumina NGS. The derived FASTQ files were processed with Illumina software to separate the clones from each library and imputed to APTANI to select potentially binding aptamers directed to IL4Ra. The experiment comprised 11 different cycles of evolutionary selection of the randomly generated aptamers, leading to a final cycle containing approximately 23 million sequences. Setting the threshold for the frequency cut-off at 10-7 , APTANI selected, from cycle 11 data, 410 842 different aptamer sequences of 99 base pair length. The majority of the sequences from the last cycle were extremely similar (9599 similarity with Clustal Omega alignment) to the Cl.42 aptamer, previously demonstrated to be specific for mouse and human IL4Ra using conventional methods (i.e. cloning and sequencing;). Interestingly, while conventional methods were able to identify the Cl.42 clone starting from cycle 5, APTANI identified Cl.42 just from the data of the first cycle of selection (cycle 1), i.e. from a pool of sequences still in the process of being selected and composed mostly of the initial random oligonucleotides with only few aptamers displaying affinity for the target. The secondary structure analysis of these cycle 1 sequences (using 100 iterations and selecting, at each iteration, a number of random aptamers equal to 20 of the entire pool) allowed selecting 53 aptamers containing secondary structure motif sub-sequences with an alignment score (with loop consensus sequences) 0.25 and clustering in three major families dominated by Cl.42 aptamer (alignment score 0.8; Supplementary). Frequency and score values of the intra-strand loop identified by APTANI in Cl.42 suggested that the CCAUGC secondary structure motif could be essential for the binding to IL4Ra. To test this hypothesis, we generated a mutant aptamer (mutCl.42) in which the CCAUGC motif was substituted by UUUCCC. The analysis of the putative secondary and tertiary structure of mutCl.42, using RNAfold and RNAComposer , confirmed that this mutation completely disrupts the intra-strand loop of Cl.42 . To experimentally verify the dependency of Cl.42 binding activity from the intra-strand loop, we evaluated Cl.42 and mutCl.42 affinities in a binding assay against epoxy beads loaded with recombinant IL4Ra. As shown in, while Cl.42 correctly binds to beads loaded with IL4Ra, the mutant aptamer does not show any binding activity suggesting that the intra-strand loop identified by APTANI is indeed required for conferring functional activity to the aptamer sequence. To access the impact of parameters on the final results, we run a second analysis with lowering the number of iterations to 50, while keeping constant the percentage of randomly picked aptamers at each cycle (i.e. 20 of all aptamers) and the frequency threshold. With this set of parameters, APTANI retrieved 30 aptamers, containing secondary structure motif sub-sequences with an alignment score 0.25 and clustering in three major families dominated by Cl.42 aptamer, whose alignment score remained 0.8. We finally performed the same analysis considering the aptamer variable region. With the same set of parameters used in the previous experiments, APTANI retrieved, from cycle 11, 416 616 different variable sequences, with a frequency spanning from 10-1 to 10-8 and a length ranging from 35 to 40 nucleotides. Of these variable sequences, 42 presented highly populated motifs and frequencies. As in theby APTANI, we first synthetized the Cl42 aptamer (A) and a mutant Cl.42 (mutCl.42, B), with the original CCAUG sequence substituted by UUUCC. Secondary structure analysis suggests that this five nucleotides substitution completely abrogates the original intra-strand loop (A and B). Then, to evaluate whether the CCAUGC motif was important for the aptamer binding to IL4Ra, Cl.42, mutCl.42 and an irrelevant aptamer were labelled with Cy3 and incubated with epoxybeads conjugated with recombinant IL4Ra. Binding was evaluated by FACS after washing out the unbound Cy3 labeled aptamer with PBS (C). As expected, the Cl.42 aptamer (red line) binds to the cognate receptor as determined by the higher fluorescence intensity detected on beads. On the contrary, the mutCl.42 aptamer (blue line) shows a binding similar to the irrelevant aptamer (gray), used as negative control previous experiments, Cl.42 aptamer resulted the most abundant sequence and its intra-strand loop among the most represented motifs. 
