Structural bioinformatics The design of optimal therapeutic small interfering RNA molecules targeting diverse strains of influenza A virus Motivation: There is an urgent need for new medications to combat influenza pandemics. Methods: Using the genome analysis of the influenza A virus performed previously, we designed and performed a combinatorial exhaustive systematic methodology for optimal design of universal therapeutic small interfering RNA molecules (siRNAs) targeting all diverse influenza A viral strains. The rationale was to integrate the factors for highly efficient design in a pipeline of analysis performed on possible influenza-targeting siRNAs. This analysis selects specific siRNAs that has the ability to target highly conserved, accessible and biologically significant regions. This would require minimal dosage and side effects. Results and Discussion: First, 6000 possible siRNAs were designed. Successive filtration followed where a novel method for siRNA scoring filtration layers was implemented. This method excluded siRNAs below the 90 experimental inhibition mapped scores using the intersection of 12 different scoring algorithms. Further filtration of siRNAs is done by eliminating those with off-targets in the human genome and those with undesirable properties and selecting siRNA targeting highly probable single-stranded regions. Finally, the optimal properties of the siRNA were ensured through selection of those targeting 100 conserved, biologically functional short motifs. Validation of a predicted active (sh114) and a predicted inactive (sh113) (that was filtered out in Stage 8) silencer of the NS1 gene showed significant inhibition of the NS1 gene for sh114, with negligible decrease for sh113 which failed target accessibility. This demonstrated the fertility of this methodology.As it is a big challenge to design universally applicable siRNAs for influenza that are potent, specific and non-toxic, we sought Page: 3368 33643370expression upon co-transfection of NS1, and NS1 shRNA, expressing vectors, in HEK293 cells. (A) HEK 293 cells (80 confluent in 12-well plates) were transfected with 1 g of FLAG NS1 from the H1N1 2009 pandemic virus (H1N1v) expression vector alone or together with 1 g NS1 specific pU6 shRNA-expressing vectors (sh113 and sh114) or together with luciferase-specific pU6 shRNA-expressing vector (shLuc). Normalization for equal amount of plasmid DNA transfected was obtained by transfecting 2 and 1 g of pFLAG empty vector, in the experimental controls were no NS1 protein and no shRNA were expressed (lane 1) or were NS1 protein was expressed but not shRNA (lane 2), respectively. Immunoblotting analysis of WCEs, collected 24 h post-transfection from HEK293 cells by using anti-FLAG and anti-actin Abs are shown. (B) The relative increase/decrease in the NS1 H1N1v expression upon co-expression of shRNAs was measured by densitometry analysis of the immunoblotting experiment and expressed as arbitrary units after normalization with the levels of actin. first to exhaustively design all possible candidates, and then filter them out based on the many factors that affect siRNA efficiency. Continuing previous work that utilized siRNAs against the M and NP segments, the silencing of the NS1 protein was also demonstrated experimentally as a test of our methodology in addition to checking the efficiency of the criteria by siRNAs that was filtered out in Stage 8 using the RNAXs tool as it had low single-stranded probability . Moreover, we provided the methodology and results for each filtration stage in Supplementary File S1. The total siRNAs that were designed (Stage 5) from both datasets, the siRNAs remaining after the 70 and 90 inhibition cutoff scores filtration (Stages 6 and 7), the siRNAs after the target accessibility filtration (Stage 8) are all displayed sequentially in the different sheets for all the six segments.have formulated a broad inhibitor of influenza A virus H1N1 strain: NP1496 and PA 2087. Our methodology has similar extrapolated three siRNAs that target the same segments (1499, 1500 in the Stage 8 siRNAs NP segment and 2088 in Stage 7 siRNAs). Similarly,have tested H5N1 targeting siRNAs. Here, siRNAs targeting all diverse strains of influenza were sought through analyzing different hosts, finding common conserved regions and using the design power of the best recommended second-generation algorithms. This was complemented by target accessibility analysis of the siRNAs using different approaches. Additionally, we selected siRNAs that target functional and completely conserved motifs to ensure a comprehensive exhaustive methodology for efficient potent siRNA selection. Out of the total designed siRNAs using siVirus, and second-generation tools, more than half remained after filtering the 70 inhibition scores and omitting siRNAs with less than two mismatches to human mRNAs. The RISC off-target effect was eliminated by excluding all siRNAs with two or less mismatches to human mRNAs. After mapping the siRNAs of 70 average experimental inhibition percent to various algorithms scores, hundreds of siRNA that covered the five influenza genome remained. The highest number of siRNAs targets PB1 (the largest segment). Cropping the list to the scores corresponding to the 90 inhibition reduced the numbers of siRNAs by more than a half, with more than a hundred siRNA for each segment. Using optimization steps, like choosing siRNAs with terminal ends having high singlestranded probability, the remaining siRNAs in each segment were in tens. Finally, using siRNAs that target functional conserved motifs, the number of siRNAs in each segment was reduced substantially to few siRNAs that we predict to be potent efficient silencers. 
