Databases and ontologies The functional therapeutic chemical classification system Motivation: Drug repositioning is the discovery of new indications for compounds that have already been approved and used in a clinical setting. Recently, some computational approaches have been suggested to unveil new opportunities in a systematic fashion, by taking into consideration gene expression signatures or chemical features for instance. We present here a novel method based on knowledge integration using semantic technologies, to capture the functional role of approved chemical compounds. Results: In order to computationally generate repositioning hypotheses, we used the Web Ontology Language to formally define the semantics of over 20 000 terms with axioms to correctly denote various modes of action (MoA). Based on an integration of public data, we have automatically assigned over a thousand of approved drugs into these MoA categories. The resulting new resource is called the Functional Therapeutic Chemical Classification System and was further evaluated against the content of the traditional Anatomical Therapeutic Chemical Classification System. We illustrate how the new classification can be used to generate drug repurposing hypotheses, using Alzheimers disease as a use-case.Drug repurposing is the use of known active compounds for new therapeutic indications . When administered in a living organism, a compound can indeed play various roles and affect different biological processes [called mode of action (; accurately identifying these different functions helps to predict the potential side-effects a drug could have and can also lead to interesting repurposing opportunities . For instance, sildenafil was initially developed to relieve angina pectoris symptoms and has been repurposed towards erectile dysfunction during the clinical trials when a new function of the target enzyme was discovered. Approved compounds are attractive because they have been extensively studied and have by definition already successfully passed clinical trials, where most drugs fail because of safety or efficacy issues. There is increasing number of approaches to predict repurposing opportunities using computational methods. Most methods operate on the profiles of physicochemical descriptors derived from molecular structures . Other methods characterize the drugs on more abstract levels, such as the gene expression signature or via the reported sideeffects . These approaches have in common to look for similarities within existing drugs and forward similar compounds as repurposing hypotheses. A feature of particular interest to describe drugs is the MoA. According to Wikipedia, the MoA describes a functional or anatomical change, at the cellular level, resulting from the exposure of a living organism to a substance. For instance terms such as transcriptional regulation agent or anticoagulant define MoAs and characterize the roles of a certain type of drugs. The MoA abstracts over the relations between molecular functions, protein targets and drug activities; it is the central concept linking a chemical structure to a set of biological activities. Intuitively, the indication of a drug logically depends on its MoA. Despite its widespread use in drug discovery, the MoA has not been used yet as a descriptor for repurposing analyses. One reason for this might be the challenge of formally defining MoAs. Indeed, MoAs are terms or categories, it is not possible to represent them straightforwardly with values and numbers like one can do for a 3D molecular structure or for a gene-expression profile. Nonetheless, the meaning of a concept can be formalized with controlled vocabularies and ontologies ; originating from description logics, such frameworks help to formalize the semantics of symbols and strings of characters with explicit axioms. In an ontology or knowledge base, concepts (interchangeable with category, term and class in this article) are organized and linked following the logical type of relation they have among them. In the Gene Ontology (GO), for example , biological processes and molecular functions terms are manually curated and their meaning specified by the relation types linking two GO terms. MoA definitions are present in other classifications such as the Medical Subject Headings or the Chemical Entities of Biological Interest for example. The Anatomical Therapeutic Chemical Classification System (ATC) also describes to some extent the action of drugs at the anatomical level. All these resources are valuable for the community as a source of carefully and manually curated information. Moreover, the categories described in these classification systems are sometimes used to annotate drugs. For instance, the compound sildenafil has been manually annotated as vasodilator agent (CHEBI:35620 or MeSH:D27.505.954.411.918). The To whom correspondence should be addressed. The Author 2013. Published by Oxford University Press. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/), which permits unrestricted reuse, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited. classifications mentioned previously are not specially designed for drug repurposing; they purposefully report only the wellknown and major MoAs of chemical compounds. The pharmacological spectrum of each drug is not necessarily well covered, yet it would be the best way to predict new indications. In our context, an ideal knowledge base would feature the known MoAs of a drug as well as some predicted ones to be tested in experiments. The MoA categories should derive and scale over primary molecular evidences exposed in biomedical databases, in an automated way. To address the lack of systematic MoA annotations, we have implemented the Functional Therapeutic Chemical Classification System (FTC), presented here in this article. The FTC is automatically built by leveraging the content of various biomedical databases using description logics and automated reasoning. Over 20 000 new MoA categories are defined in the resource and further populated with approved drugs using the Web Ontology Language (OWL) in combination with a reasoner. The population step takes in account the type of pharmacological action, the molecular targets of the drugs and their involvement into biological processes. Drugs can exhibit several MoAs, and the same MoA can be reached through different mechanisms. Most of the drugs are present in multiple FTC categories, reflecting the various roles a compound can play inside a biological system which can serve as starting point for repurposing. The resource was evaluated against the ATC, traditional classification scheme introduced before. We present as well some preliminary analyses over the data, by looking at the relation between the MoA and the indication of a compound using semantic similarity. Finally, we illustrate also how the FTC can be used as a pharmacological toolbox to analyze drug repurposing for Alzheimers disease.The knowledge base behind the FTC is built by integrating information coming from various sources. The GO terms serve as template to create the FTC categories describing the MoAs; DrugBank provides the known links between drugs and their protein targets and Uniprot maps targets to their respective GO annotations . Drugs are further assigned into MoA categories according to the OWL constructs and axioms defined in the FTC. A reasoner, a program capable of understanding such axioms, performed this task (see Section 5 for details). The process to build the FTC is summarized inalongside an example. The core step is the generation of axiomatic representations of MoAs by decomposing GO types into positive and negative regulations of biomolecular functions and processes. With the help of reasoning techniques, we can further derive and assign MoA across the knowledge base to given drugs. It requires a few seconds (four processing cores, 4-GB RAM) to classify the knowledge base [ELK reasoner, (. Other OWL reasoners (e.g. Hermit, Pellet, etc.) disqualified mainly due to long processing time (data not shown). The FTC forms a taxonomic structure as illustrated on, which arises when the reasoner classifies the knowledge base. In general, categories may have multiple parents and multiple children (see https://www.ebi.ac.uk/chembl/ftc for interactive use). In total there are 1280 FDA-approved DrugBank compounds (chemical and biotherapeutics) associated with 1264 human protein targets, where each drug is acting on at least one human protein target. The FTC introduces 23 353 new categories describing the mode and mechanism of action of therapeutic compounds. Of these categories, 4289 belong to the biological processes in GO and 19 064 to the molecular functions. A summary of the metrics behind the latest build is available online at https://www.ebi.ac.uk/chembl/ftc/evaluation/. Out of all FTC categories, 1432 categories (46) directly contain at least one approved drug. This number increases up to 2532 (411) when direct and indirect drugs are considered. FTC categories not containing drugs (e.g. FTC_A0001771-Anti-immunological synapse formation agent) represent MoAs for which no approved compounds has qualified yet or that have not been identified as such in the FTC.The FTC is public resource, which should assist drug repurposing initiatives or enhance computational studies that judge drugs according to their mode of action. The resource attributes biomolecular functions and processes to drugs, the same way as GO types have been assigned to gene products. The construction of FTC relies on axiomatic representations of MoA as the core means to attribute and derive the MoA for approved drugs. We shown the validity of the approach by comparing the content of the FTC to a well-established gold standard, the ATC. We further illustrate the tight relationship between the MoA and the indication of a drug and demonstrate using Alzheimers disease as an example how the resource helps to formulate drug repositioning hypotheses. The work leverages the semantics of distinct databases, working in parallel on different thematics. The platform will be further used to generate predictions in a systematic fashion, which can then be experimentally tested in the laboratory for validation. 
