The RNA Newton polytope and learnability of energy parameters Motivation: Computational RNA structure prediction is a mature important problem that has received a new wave of attention with the discovery of regulatory non-coding RNAs and the advent of high-throughput transcriptome sequencing. Despite nearly two score years of research on RNA secondary structure and RNARNA interaction prediction, the accuracy of the state-of-the-art algorithms are still far from satisfactory. So far, researchers have proposed increasingly complex energy models and improved parameter estimation methods, experimental and/or computational, in anticipation of endowing their methods with enough power to solve the problem. The output has disappointingly been only modest improvements, not matching the expectations. Even recent massively featured machine learning approaches were not able to break the barrier. Why is that? Approach: The first step toward high-accuracy structure prediction is to pick an energy model that is inherently capable of predicting each and every one of known structures to date. In this article, we introduce the notion of learnability of the parameters of an energy model as a measure of such an inherent capability. We say that the parameters of an energy model are learnable iff there exists at least one set of such parameters that renders every known RNA structure to date the minimum free energy structure. We derive a necessary condition for the learnability and give a dynamic programming algorithm to assess it. Our algorithm computes the convex hull of the feature vectors of all feasible structures in the ensemble of a given input sequence. Interestingly, that convex hull coincides with the Newton polytope of the partition function as a polynomial in energy parameters. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first approach toward computing the RNA Newton polytope and a systematic assessment of the inherent capabilities of an energy model. The worst case complexity of our algorithm is exponential in the number of features. However, dimen-sionality reduction techniques can provide approximate solutions to avoid the curse of dimensionality. Results: We demonstrated the application of our theory to a simple energy model consisting of a weighted count of A-U, C-G and G-U base pairs. Our results show that this simple energy model satisfies the necessary condition for more than half of the input unpseudo-knotted sequencestructure pairs (55) chosen from the RNA STRAND v2.0 database and severely violates the condition for $13, which provide a set of hard cases that require further investigation. From 1350 RNA strands, the observed 3D feature vector for 749 strands is on the surface of the computed polytope. For 289 RNA strands, the observed feature vector is not on the boundary of the polytope but its distance from the boundary is not more than one. A distance of one essentially means one base pair difference between the observed structure and the closest point on the boundary of the polytope, which need not be the feature vector of a structure. For 171 sequences, this distance is larger than two, and for only 11 sequences, this distance is larger than five. Availability: The source code is available on http://compbio.cs.wayne. edu/software/rna-newton-polytope.Computational RNA structure and RNARNA interaction prediction have always been important problems, particularly now that RNA has been shown to have key regulatory roles in the cell . Furthermore, with the advent of synthetic biology at the whole organism level , high-throughput accurate RNA engineering algorithms are required for both in vivo and in vitro applications . Since the dawn of RNA secondary structure prediction nearly two score years ago , the research community has proposed increasingly complex models and algorithms, hoping that refined features together with better methods to estimate their parameters would solve the problem. Early approaches considered mere base pair counting, followed by the Turner thermodynamics model, which was a significant leap forward. Recently, massively feature-rich models empowered by parameter estimation algorithms have been proposed, but they provide only modest improvements. Despite significant progress in the last three decades, made possible by the work ofon measuring RNA thermodynamic energy parameters and the work of several groups on novel algorithms (;) and machine learning approaches , the RNA structure prediction accuracy has not reached a satisfactory level yet . Why is it so? Up to now, human intuition and computational convenience have led the way. We believe that human intuition has to be equipped with systematic methods to assess the suitability of a given energy model. Surprisingly, there is not a single method to assess whether the parameters of an energy model are learnable. We say that the parameters of an energy model are learnable iff there exists at least one set of such parameters that renders every known RNA structure to date, determined through radiograph or NMR, the minimum free energy structure. Equivalently, we say that the parameters of an energy model are learnable iff 100 structure prediction accuracy can be achieved when the training and test sets are identical. The first step toward high-accuracy structure prediction is to make sure that the To whom correspondence should be addressed. The Author 2013. Published by Oxford University Press. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Non-Commercial License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/ by-nc/3.0/), which permits non-commercial re-use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited. For commercial re-use, please contact journals.permissions@oup.com energy model is inherently capable, i.e. its parameters are learnable. In this work, we provide a necessary condition for the learnability and an algorithm to verify it. The problem of learnability was previously studied for sequence alignment using similar methods . To the best of our knowledge, this is the first approach toward a systematic assessment of the suitability of an energy model for RNA structure prediction. Note that a successful RNA folding algorithm needs to have the generalization power to predict unseen structures as well. However, if an energy model is inherently incapable of predicting known structures correctly, then it does not matter if it has the generalization power. We leave analysis of the generalization power for future work.For each strand of RNA, the distance between cx, y, the real feature vector of the secondary structure and the computed convex hull, N x, is calculated using . We denote this distance by r(x) here. The necessary condition for the learnability is satisfied if rx 0 for all x in the dataset, which shows that the observed feature vector lies on the boundary of N x.illustrates the secondary structure of a ribosomal RNA and its 2D and 3D Newton polytopes. This RNA is 116 nt long, and the distance between the polytope and the observed feature vector for this RNA is 2. In the 2D (AU, CG) model, this distance is 10. The observed feature vector has moved closer to the boundary, going from 2D to 3D, as GU pairs are accounted for in the 3D model.shows a shorter HIV-1 RNA with the length of 32 nt. The distance between the 3D polytope and the observed feature vector for this RNA is 0, while there is a distance of 2 in the 2D model. In this case also, the observed feature vector has moved closer to the boundary, going from 2D to 3D. Because there is no GU pair in this observed structure, the observed feature vector lies on the c 3 x, y 0 face, which is on the boundary of the polytope.illustrates Escherichia coli 5S ribosomal RNA, which is 121 nt long, and the distance between the feature vector and the polytope is 7 in this case. The distance has not changed in the 3D model.demonstrates the histogram of r(x) for the input dataset. Out of 1350 strands of RNA, the observed feature vector is on the surface of the 3D Newton polytope for 749 (55) sequences. The distance r is not zero, but not more than one, for 289 (21) sequences.distance is between 1 and 2, and for 171 (13) strands, it is more than 2, and just for 11 ($1) sequences, this distance is above 5. As it is clear from, the largest r is 8 bp in the 3D model. The second plot inshows the normalized distance histogram. The third root of the polytopes volume is used as the normalization factor. For the same set of strands, the observed feature vector of only 176 strands lies on the boundary of the 2D Newton polygon. For 327 sequence, this distance is larger than 5. As you can see in, the maximum distance between an observed feature vector and the polygon is 14 in the 2D model. The second plot inshows the normalized distance histogram. The square root of the polygons area is used as the normalization factor. 
