Gene expression The use of semiparametric mixed models to analyze PamChip peptide array data: an application to an oncology experiment Motivation: Phosphorylation by protein kinases is a central theme in biological systems. Aberrant protein kinase activity has been implicated in a variety of human diseases (e.g. cancer). Therefore, modulation of kinase activity represents an attractive therapeutic approach for the treatment of human illnesses. Thus, identification of signature peptides is crucial for protein kinase targeting and can be achieved by using PamChip microarray technology. We propose a flexible semiparametric mixed model for analyzing PamChip data. This approach enables the estimation of the phosphorylation rate (Velocity) as a function of time together with pointwise confidence intervals. Results: Using a publicly available dataset, we show that our model is capable of adequately fitting the kinase activity profiles and provides velocity estimates over time. Moreover, it allows to test for differences in the velocity of kinase inhibition between responding and non-responding cell lines. This can be done at individual time point as well as for the entire velocity profile.Scientific advances in biotechnology bring us in a new era of targeted therapies and personalized medicine. Biomarkers are essential for selecting patients that benefit from certain treatments, and biomarker discovery is nowadays driven by novel platforms that measure more biological properties more precisely. Evidently, these technological advances often require the development of optimal analysis approaches for its generated data in order to increase its detection power. Here, we propose a statistical model to efficiently analyze output from PamChip microarrays. These high-content peptide arrays are capable of measuring phosphorylation changes over time for more than hundred peptides simultaneously . To whom correspondence should be addressed.Compared to conventional microarrays, PamChips have two main advantages. First, proteins are closer to phenotypic expression than DNA or mRNA profiles. Second, PamChips are not measuring concentrations but biological activity, i.e. phosphorylation over time. An important application area of PamChip microarrays is the study of protein kinase activity . Protein kinase inhibitors can specifically block key signaling pathways in cancer, making kinases very popular targets in anticancer-targeted therapy discovery programs . PamChip microarrays have a very distinct technical design (see Section 1 of the Supplementary Material for more details) and the data properties of the PamChip read-out are atypical compared with more traditional microarrays. Hence, specific data analysis pipeline has to be developed for PamChip microarrays. In this article, we demonstrate the statistical methodology to model the kinase activity profiles and thereby estimate the phosphorylation rate, referred to as velocity. With the proposed approach, phosphorylation rates can be investigated and tested for each peptide. The article is organized as follows. Section 2 describes a real-life PamChip microarray experiment that is used to demonstrate our method. In Section 3, we describe existing methods for analyzing PamChip array data and motivate our approach. In Section 4, we give a brief review of penalized smoothing splines formulated as mixed models, specify the proposed model, specifically adapt it to the PamChip array data at hand and focus on the inference problem of this study. The results are given in Section 5. The discussion and conclusions are presented in Sections 6 and 7, respectively.Signal intensity profiles are the outcomes of the peptide microarray experiment and correspond to the degree of phosphorylation. For assessing the impact of the kinase inhibitor compound, however, the phosphorylation rate is required.modeled peptide array data with an exponential model, Y ij = Y o +Y max, where the Y ij values stand for the signal intensity of subject i at j-th time point, Y o is the signal intensities at the beginning of the experiment and Y max is the maximum observed intensity. is the reaction rate constant and t j is the time point when the image was recorded. Only the initial velocity of the peptide phosphorylation was used for subsequent data analysis.preprocessed each PamChip profile separately using CurveFitHT software for deriving the initial velocity at the first kinetic time point read. They only used the first 30 min of the assay and based all subsequent data analysis on the estimated initial velocities. In particular, the estimated initial velocities were log 2 transformed and are used for comparing responsive and non-responsive cell lines with a mixed model. Bothuse a two stage approach where (i) exponential models are used in the first stage to summarize the individual time series into a single value i.e initial velocities and (ii) these estimated initial velocities are assessed in the downstream analysis without accounting for their associated uncertainty. Hence, they ignore the within replicate variability and only capture the technical variation between the replicates. This can have a severe effect on the outcome of the second stage analysis if the within variability of the replicates is large as compared to the between variability and in case that the uncertainty of the initial velocity estimates differs among replicates, cell lines or treatments. Hence, the Hilhorst method and the Versele method might suffer from a loss in power, efficiency and an incorrect control of the type I error . We propose a semiparametric mixed effects model that combines both the estimation and modeling stage into a single analysis. Moreover, the link between mixed models and smoothing provides a very flexible framework for estimating the kinase activity profiles in a data-driven way. Within the mixed model framework, it is very natural to account for the dependence structure of the intensity signals within and across activity profiles by modeling all data for a given peptide, simultaneously. The proposed semiparametric mixed model allows for testing whether the change in phosphorylation rate (velocity) induced by the treatment (compound) effect differs between responsive and non-responsive cell lines. The tests can be performed at any time point as well as for the entire profile, simultaneously. Further, velocity profiles can be derived as a function of time along with 95 pointwise confidence bands.We apply the proposed method to a publicly available dataset from, which we described in Section 2. Similar to microarray technology, PamChip data are also subject to noise and we use background corrected intensity measurements for the data analysis. Prior to fitting the model, we examine the data for unusual observations and extreme profiles. Outlier removal has been done in three steps. First, we notice that some of the observations are negative for a given kinase activity profile. The PamChip software reports background corrected intensities. Hence, negative observations might occur when the measured intensity for a particular peptide in a certain well does not exceed the background signal. Negative intensity measurements are replaced by half of the positive minimum intensity measurement of that profile. Second, we compute the area under the curve (AUC) for each profile of a given cell line. Analysis of variance has been carried out based on those AUC values while taking the treatment as covariate with two levels. Extreme profiles whose residuals are beyond 2 the square root of the mean squared error are removed. Third, we look at the observations within a profile and remove the extreme observations if they differ more than 2 standard deviations of the profile-specific mean. In this step, we are able to remove extremely high intensity measurements (spikes). All these steps are repeated for each peptide and each cell line. Supplementary Figures S6 and S7 illustrate these preprocessing steps for peptide AMPE_5_17_Y12 and cell line N87. The filtered data are then log 2 transformed to stabilize the variability over time.Protein kinases are key regulators of important cellular processes, including growth, stress response, differentiation and apoptosis. For drug development, signal transduction research and clinical research, in-depth insight in the effects of stimuli on multiple protein kinases is often required in order to fully understand the effects of kinase inhibitors. The novel PamChip technology enables us to monitor kinase activity in a highly multiplex setting with wide range of peptides. We have proposed a semiparametric mixed model to analyze PamChip array data. Our aim was to model the kinase activity profiles and estimate the rate of phosphorylation (velocity) over time. The proposed approach is capable of modeling these Page: 2864 28592865 
