Structural bioinformatics TiPs: a database of therapeutic targets in pathogens and associated tools Motivation: The need for new drugs and new targets is particularly compelling in an era that is witnessing an alarming increase of drug resistance in human pathogens. The identification of new targets of known drugs is a promising approach, which has proven successful in several cases. Here, we describe a database that includes information on 5153 putative drugtarget pairs for 150 human pathogens derived from available drugtarget crystallographic complexes.Novel mechanisms to escape therapy are constantly emerging among human pathogen populations, and this clearly urges the development, on one hand, of new drugs for the treatment of the diseases and, on the other hand, of rapid and effective methods to help expand the landscape of available treatment options . In this context, computational studies are called on to help identify novel therapeutic targets and characterize their interactions, and indeed a number of such efforts are described in the literature . However, these are mostly devoted to the analysis of single targets or specific tropical disease pathogens. The TiPs database has been developed with the aim of facilitating the identification of new therapeutic targets in4150 organisms responsible for human infections. We performed a large-scale analysis to systematically identify candidate targets in the proteomes of such organisms. The rationale of our approach is based on the intrinsic polypharmacological behaviour of compounds targeting homologous proteins . We considered all drugtarget pairs for which the 3D structure of the complex is experimentally known and used the sequence of the target to identify its homologues in human pathogens. The evolutionary conservation of such homologues and their 3D structures (available or predicted) were used to verify whether the original drug was in principle able to bind them as it does the original target. To this aim, stringent filters were applied to ensure that predicted binding sites and their interactions with the drug are as accurate as possible. Pathogen proteins predicted with high confidence to be therapeutic targets and the putative drugs interacting with them were collected and annotated in TiPs.TiPs currently contains 4071 candidate pathogen target structures involved in 5153 different drugtarget complexes in 150 pathogens. All entries are thoroughly annotated with both sequence and functional information. The database can be queried by organism name (genus or specie name), protein family or function (EC number, GO terms and Pfam), as well as UniProt ID. The query returns a sortable table providing information about both known and predicted drugtarget pairs and links to visualize specific information on the drug(s) (physicochemical properties, structure, indication and side effects), the target(s) [UniProt annotation and PDB structure(s)] and to visually analyse or download their 3D complexes. Ligplot drawings of both the known and inferred binding sites in complex with the drug are available as well . 
