Genome analysis Treephyler: fast taxonomic profiling of metagenomes Assessment of phylogenetic diversity is a key element to the analysis of microbial communities. Tools are needed to handle next-generation sequencing data and to cope with the computational complexity of large-scale studies. Here, we present Treephyler, a tool for fast taxonomic profiling of metagenomes. Treephyler was evaluated on real metagenome to assess its performance in comparison to previous approaches for taxonomic profiling. Results indicate that Treephyler is in terms of speed and accuracy prepared for next-generation sequencing techniques and large-scale analysis.Beyond the analysis of single species genomes of culturable organisms, metagenomics currently opens a new view on the exploration of microbial communities. Progress in sequencing technology enables broader and deeper genomic sampling of the biosphere which in turn puts new challenges for sequence analysis methods. Problems arise from the sheer mass and the short length of sequencing reads. Usually only a small fraction of reads can be assembled due to the phylogenetic diversity in the samples. In the first instance, large-scale analysis of short metagenomic sequencing reads has to provide an estimate of the phylogenetic distribution of the sample. Taxonomic profiling achieves this task by assigning sequencing reads to phylogenetic categories. The most common methods are based on homology to known genes. The classical gold standard approach to taxonomic profiling in metagenomics is focused on the 16S rRNA gene and relies on a sufficient number of sequences of that gene in metagenomic sequence data. Usually the number of reads containing sufficiently long stretches of 16S rRNA is small. Therefore, several researchers perform deep sequencing of that particular gene [see e.g. (. Although this approach efficiently overcomes the sparseness of 16S rRNA in metagenomic samples, the sequence data support taxonomic profiling only,Page: 961 960961. The relative amount of assigned sequences is shown for each method as well as for each bacterial phylum for the glacial ice metagenome. screen matching sequencing reads for significant hits. Reads are classified using a phylogenetic tree. For each PFAM family with a sufficient number of newly assigned sequences, approximate-maximum likelihood trees of the PFAM database sequences and the matching reads are computed using FastTree, which combines the speed of minimum-evolution methods with the accuracy of maximum likelihood methods. Once trees are computed, Treephyler uses the algorithm of to classify reads according to the phylogenetic placement in the tree (see also Treephyler web site). Treephyler offers an efficient way to balance the computation load on multi-core computers or computer clusters. By this, the runtime only depends on the computation of the largest trees. Similar to CARMA, Treephyler only computes trees for PFAM families with less than 3000 (assigned + reference) sequences.The glacial ice dataset was taken as a reference because of its relatively short read length (200 bp), the availability of results from a 16S analysis and the moderate sample size (0.2 Gbp). We analysed the glacial ice dataset to assess the performance of Treephyler in comparison with the tree-based tool CARMA and the signature-based tool Phymm, and the 16S RNA reference analysis. The analysis was conducted on a single 2.4 GHz dual-core CPU AMD Opteron with 16 Gb RAM. For runtime comparison, we randomly selected 1 of the glacial ice dataset to allow the comparison with CARMA. Both Treephyler and Phymm analysed the reduced dataset in 25 min, while it took CARMA 168 h to complete the analysis. On the full dataset, Treephyler needed only 12 h, while Phymm needed 30 h. The estimated runtime for CARMA is 696 h. The runtime of UFO for the reduced and the full dataset was 22 s and 30 m, respectively. Results on the full dataset of Treephyler and CARMA [taken from (are in good agreement with the 16 S analysis, expect for the phyla Bacteroidetes (Phymm: 3, CARMA: 8, Treephyler: 9, 16S: 30) and Betaproteobacteria (P: 21, C: 24, T : 24, 16S: 41), where all three methods differ from the 16S analysis (see). This may be the consequence of an uneven taxon sampling of PFAM. Remarkably, Phymm also disagreed on the phyla Firmicutes (P: 11, 16S: 0) and Gammaproteobacteria (P: 21, 16S: 5). Test data and additional results for the class level are available at the Treephyler web site.We introduced Treephyler, a new tool for fast taxonomic profiling of metagenomes. We evaluated our method on real metagenomic data by comparison with previous approaches for taxonomic profiling. We could show a close correspondence between the predicted profiles of Treephyler and CARMA, while computational speed was increased by orders of magnitude. While speed is not necessarily an essential requirement in genome analysis, the increase of metagenomic sequence data urges for particularly efficient techniques, which also work with limited computational resources. Therefore, the approach we propose here is well prepared for nextgeneration sequencing technologies and large-scale studies like the exploration of the human microbiome. Funding: DFG (German Research Foundation) Priority Program SPP1174 Deep Metazoan Phylogeny (Project Wo896/6-1,2). 
