Genome analysis Trowel: a fast and accurate error correction module for Illumina sequencing reads Motivation: The ability to accurately read the order of nucleotides in DNA and RNA is fundamental for modern biology. Errors in next-generation sequencing can lead to many artifacts, from erroneous genome assemblies to mistaken inferences about RNA editing. Uneven coverage in datasets also contributes to false corrections. Result: We introduce Trowel, a massively parallelized and highly efficient error correction module for Illumina read data. Trowel both corrects erroneous base calls and boosts base qualities based on the k-mer spectrum. With high-quality k-mers and relevant base information , Trowel achieves high accuracy for different short read sequen-cing applications.The latency in the data path has been significantly reduced because of efficient data access and data structures. In performance evaluations, Trowel was highly competitive with other tools regardless of coverage, genome size read length and fragment size. Availability and implementation: Trowel is written in C+ + and is provided under the General Public License v3.0 (GPLv3). It is available at http://trowelReads produced by current next-generation sequencing technologies typically suffer from relatively high base error rates. To improve downstream analyses, it is desirable to correct sequencing errors directly after base calling. The most widely applied error correction methods rely on k-mer spectrum-based algorithms, following the spectral alignment (SA) approach . A k-mer occurring more often than a given threshold is called solid (or trusted) and a less frequent k-mer is named weak. The goal of the SA approach is to maximize the number of solid calls. Quake , a widely used error correction module, applies a mixed model of the distributions of solid and weak calls incorporating quality values. It identifies the set of corrections that maximizes the number of k-mers using a maximum likelihood approach. Another k-merbased method, Musket , uses two-stage corrections with similarity to Trowels two methods. Musket corrects bases depending on frequencies of k-mers and does not use base qualities. Coral (Salmela and Schr oder, 2011) collects similar reads into groups and performs multiple alignments on them. It can correct indels by using the Needleman Wunsch algorithm. Owing to the alignment complexity, this method is not favorable for large datasets. Yet, another approach is to build a suffix array or trie. For example, Hybrid SHREC can correct indels by detecting and replacing low-weight nodes. The weight of a node indicates the number of cohort edges in a suffix trie. Here, we introduce a new k-merbased error correction module, Trowel, suitable for Illumina datasets. The key difference to other tools is that instead of relying on the uniformity of sequencing coverage, which fluctuates stochastically or inherently, Trowel trusts in sequences with continuously high-quality values. We demonstrate the accuracy and efficiency of Trowel with several datasets and compare it with other available read correction tools.We performed our evaluations on paired-end Arabidopsis thaliana reads (86) generated in-house and on Illumina datasets referenced in for Escherichia coli (163 618), Staphylococcus aureus (691), Saccharomyces cerevisiae (319) and Drosophila melanogaster (626) (Supplementary). We assessed runtime and accuracy in several applications, and summarized all local ranks of each metric in a sum-ofrank table . Trowel was scored consistently as one of the top two tools and was among the two most accurate tools for high-coverage datasets (Supplementary Section S4.1). Trowel has a better performance than the other tools with genome assemblies on high-coverage datasets, while on low-coverage datasets, the alignment-based tool Coral outperformed all other k-merbased methods including Trowel. When the coverage is highly variable, i.e. for transcriptomes, the dataset is particularly hard to correct because low-coverage sequences cannot be equated with higher likelihood of errors. In transcriptome mapping evaluation for a human dataset , SEECER achieved the best performance (Supplementary Section S2.3). Aside from this specialized tool, Trowel obtained the best read accuracy, but was slightly worse in base accuracy than Coral. Only Trowel improved transcriptome quantification; for the other tools including SEECER, the performance was worse than the uncorrected cases. For SNP calling evaluations, Trowel showed the highest concordance with high-coverage datasets in three of four cases (Supplementary Section S2.4). Finally, Trowel was the only tool that consistently generated expected results with simulated datasets for an erroneous-basenext-to-repeats problem (Supplementary Section S2.5). Concerning runtime, Trowel outperformed all other tools for all datasets, being up to 100 times faster . Detailed results are provided in Supplementary Data. 
