Unipept web services for metaproteomics analysis Unipept is an open source web application that is designed for metaproteomics analysis with a focus on interactive datavisualization. It is underpinned by a fast index built from UniProtKB and the NCBI taxonomy that enables quick retrieval of all UniProt entries in which a given tryptic peptide occurs. Unipept version 2.4 introduced web services that provide programmatic access to the metaproteomics analysis features. This enables integration of Unipept functionality in custom applications and data processing pipelines. Availability and implementation: The web services are freely available at http://api.unipept.ugent. be and are open sourced under the MIT license.Unipept is a web application for biodiversity analysis of complex metaproteomics samples . The application is powered by a fast index built from UniProtKB and a cleaned up version of the NCBI taxonomy . This index enables quick retrieval of all UniProt entries in which a given tryptic peptide occurs. Using the taxonomic annotations of UniProt entries, Unipept also returns the complete set of organisms in which a given peptide occurs. This set of organisms is then processed using a Lowest Common Ancestor (LCA) algorithm to determine the taxonomic specificity of the peptide. All results are presented in clear overview tables and in an interactive treeview. Fast computation of LCAs for given lists of peptides also enables interactive biodiversity analysis of metaproteomics datasets. The biodiversity in complex samples can then be inspected using multiple interactive visualizations such as a treeview (Supplementary), a sunburst view (Supplementary) and a treemap (Supplementary). All visualizations on the Unipept website can be saved as publication-grade graphics, and all analysis results can be exported as Microsoft Excel-compatible CSV files. To guarantee optimal performance and correctness, the Unipept project pursues excellence regarding best practices for modern web application development. One example of this is automatic correctness testing by over 1000 tests after each code change. The entire application including the web services is open source and licensed under the terms of the MIT license. The source code can be found at http://github.com/unipept/unipept. In this article, we present the latest addition to the Unipept toolbox: a set of web services that expose the Unipept analysis functions for use in other applications and data processing pipelines.The Unipept project consists of two main parts: a collection of scripts to construct the database and the web application. The first part of the database construction, the code to parse UniProt, was recently updated to use Berkeley DB , a high performance key value store, to store intermediate results. This resulted in an enormous boost in parsing speed: where the old parser took over 30 days to parse UniProt, the new approach using Berkeley DB does the job in under 10 hours. The second part of the database construction is the pre-calculation of the LCAs of all the peptides in the database. The old Ruby code was rewritten in Java and computation time was reduced from over four weeks to just 15 min with the help of some new Java 8 features. The combination of these advancements allows us to consistently offer analysis results based on the latest UniProt release. The second part of Unipept is a Ruby on Rails web application that uses JavaScript for all client side interactions. All data visualizations are made in-house with the D3.js JavaScript library . The GalaxyP project already takes advantage of the new Unipept web services to integrate Unipept functionality into the Galaxy Framework . Exact matching of peptides to UniProt entries is also implemented by the Peptide Match application of the Protein Information Resource (PIR). Where Unipept is restricted for use with tryptic peptides, Peptide 
