Using combined evidence from replicates to evaluate ChIP-seq peaks Motivation: Chromatin Immunoprecipitation followed by sequencing (ChIP-seq) detects genome-wide DNAprotein interactions and chromatin modifications, returning enriched regions (ERs), usually associated with a significance score. Moderately significant interactions can correspond to true, weak interactions, or to false positives; replicates of a ChIP-seq experiment can provide co-localised evidence to decide between the two cases. We designed a general methodological framework to rigorously combine the evidence of ERs in ChIP-seq replicates, with the option to set a significance threshold on the repeated evidence and a minimum number of samples bearing this evidence. Results: We applied our method to Myc transcription factor ChIP-seq datasets in K562 cells available in the ENCODE project. Using replicates, we could extend up to 3 times the ER number with respect to single-sample analysis with equivalent significance threshold. We validated the rescued ERs by checking for the overlap with open chromatin regions and for the enrichment of the motif that Myc binds with strongest affinity; we compared our results with alternative methods (IDR and jMOSAiCS), obtaining more validated peaks than the former and less peaks than latter, but with a better validation. Availability and implementation: An implementation of the proposed method and its source code under GPLv3 license are freely available atChromatin immunoprecipitation followed by next-generation sequencing (ChIP-seq) is the most commonly used method to study genome-wide chromatin modifications or proteinDNA interactions. Computational tools like MACS or ZINBA are applied on aligned ChIP-seq reads to detect enriched regions (ERs) over the genome (often called peaks), where the local accumulation of sequencing fragments exceeds that of a background distribution, typically estimated from randomly fragmented chromatin or by performing the ChIP-seq protocol with a control antibody . As the protocol is subjected to multiple sources of noise , some low-intensity accumulation of reads is possible even in absence of a true interaction with the target. These low-intensity peaks, which are usually present in large amounts, contain therefore a mixture of false positives and true, although weak, interactions; they are typically discarded when stringent thresholds on the peak call are used. This approach leads to the discovery of the strongest interactions only, and might distort the genome-wide picture of the genomic locations of the transcription factor binding sites or histone modifications of interest.Given the intrinsic noise of the ChIP-seq protocol, it is good practice to repeat every experiment at least twice, as the guidelines of the ENCODE project indicate . The information contained in replicates can then be used to assess the validity of the peaks obtained from a single sample, especially of those with low-intensity. In this paper, we propose a novel method to rigorously combine the results of peak calls in ChIP-seq replicates and to obtain new, sample-specific, peak lists taking into account their combined evidence. Our method takes as input, for each replicate, a list of enriched genomic regions and a measure of their individual significance in terms of a P-value. Starting from a permissive call, we divide the initial ERs in stringent (highly significant) and weak (moderately significant), and we assess the presence of overlapping enriched regions across multiple replicates. Non-overlapping regions can be penalised or discarded according to specific needs. The significance of the overlapping regions is rigorously combined with the Fishers method to obtain a global score. Finally, this score is assessed against an adjustable threshold on the combined evidence, and peaks in each replicate are either confirmed or discarded (a schematic view of our method is given inand a visualisation of the results of the method on data from the ENCODE project is shown in). In other words, we are able to rescue weak peaks, which would probably be discarded in a singlesample analysis, when their combined evidence across multiple samples is sufficiently strong. We applied our method to ENCODE datasets from ChIP-seq experiments of the Myc transcription factor in K562 human cells, for which multiple samples with replicates are available. As Myc preferentially binds to a well-defined motif, the choice of this TF allowed us to validate our results through motif analysis and DNase-seq data; finally, we compared our findings with other state-of-art methods. The strong aspects of our method, besides the validity and relevance of the results that it provides, are its simplicity and flexibility, together with its efficiency (few minutes for 23 replicates with a few tens of thousands of peaks each).In this section, we report the results obtained by applying our method on either technical or biological ChIP-seq replicates. The method takes as input the genomic coordinates and a measure of significance (i.e. the P-value) of each of the ERs for each replicate considered. For each input sample j, it outputs the lists of confirmed (R j o ) and discarded (R j d) ERs, as well as the lists of stringent confirmed (R s,c ), weak confirmed (R w,c ), stringent discarded (R s,d ) and weak discarded (R w,d ) ERs. Adjustable parameters of the method are: T s (maximum P-value to consider a peak as stringent), T w (maximum P-value to consider a peak as weak), C (minimum number of samples with intersecting peaks needed to apply the combined evidence evaluation), c (maximum combined significance to confirm a peak), a (maximum falseWe introduced a novel and rigorous method to combine evidence in ChIP-seq replicates and we applied it to several ENCODE datasets for the transcription factor Myc in the K562 cell line. Our results confirmed that a considerable number of ERs, which display a weak significance in single-sample analysis, can be rescued by the help of co-localised evidence in multiple replicates. We proved that the nucleotide sequences spanned by these weak peaks are almost always found in open chromatin regions and enriched for the Myc canonical E-box motif, for which the Myc protein has the highest affinity. Surprisingly, even in the case of technical replicates, where reproducibility should be high, we found that discarding ERs only on the base of the lack of overlap often results in the dismissal of true binding sites. This can be due to the fact that our technical replicates were simulated using a computational procedure starting from the biological replicates available; nonetheless, we recommend to be careful in setting the overlapping parameter to high stringency (i.e. C J). We stress that our method works as a post-processing of a permissive peak call and it does not question the reliability of the output of the peak caller (any peak caller providing a P-value score can be used; we recommend using the same peak caller with the same parameters on all the replicates). The method has three main strengths:(i) rigour: single-sample evidence from each replicate is combined through the Fishers method; (ii) versatility: with the choice of a few parameters, it can be decided to weight co-localisation (C) and combined significance (c) differently; (iii) efficiency: typically, theComparison of the output set R o (3rd column) with ERs obtained by jMOSAiCS (4th column). The 5th and 6th columns show the number of peaks that are present in R o but not in the jMOSAiCS output, and the enrichment of the Myc canonical E-box in this last set, respectively. Vice versa, the 7th and 8th columns show the number of peaks present in the jMOSAiCS output but not in R o , and the corresponding enrichment of the E-box, respectively. For Myc1, the comparison was done only with replicates 1 and 3. jMOSAiCS outputs a large number of ERs, including most of the peaks identified by our method, but only a fraction of the jMOSAiCS-specific peaks contains the Myc binding motif. Each E-box column refers to the set described in the previous column and is marked as follows: Y: presence of the E-box; N: absence of the E-box; -: set too small to find any enriched motif. 
