Gene expression aRrayLasso: a network-based approach to microarray interconversion Robust conversion between microarray platforms is needed to leverage the wide variety of microarray expression studies that have been conducted to date. Currently available conversion methods rely on manufacturer annotations, which are often incomplete, or on direct alignment of probes from different platforms, which often fail to yield acceptable genewise correlation. Here, we describe aRrayLasso, which uses the Lasso-penalized generalized linear model to model the relationships between individual probes in different probe sets. We have implemented aRrayLasso in a set of five open-source R functions that allow the user to acquire data from public sources such as Gene Expression Omnibus, train a set of Lasso models on that data and directly map one microarray platform to another. aRrayLasso significantly predicts expression levels with similar fidelity to technical replicates of the same RNA pool, demonstrating its utility in the integration of datasets from different platforms. Availability and implementation: All functions are available, along with descriptions, at https://A pressing issue in translational biology is the ability to reference and utilize historical microarray datasets for large-scale discovery programs . The appeal of using historical datasets includes capturing previous investment to construct larger cohorts. Despite interest in both industry and academia , few groups have attempted to tackle the problem of platform integration. Current approaches primarily rely upon passing different microarray platforms through a common identifier system, such as EntrezGene IDs, using specially designed packages or online tools . While these systems work well in cases where manufacturers have maintained annotations of their microarray databases, ID-based conversion methods fail for deprecated and undermaintained microarray platforms. Another approach to convert between platforms is sequenced-based, wherein each sequence tag is aligned to the genome or transcriptome and annotated . Unfortunately, it is often the case that de novo annotations do not capture the complexity of the transcriptome (e.g. for genes with alternative splice variants). To address the shortcomings of both annotation-and sequencebased conversion methods, we have developed aRrayLasso, a Lassoregression based network model. Our method directly predicts the probe expression levels of the target platform. To demonstrate the accuracy of our method, we show that predictions made using aRrayLasso are of similar accuracy to technical replicates from the 6 same mRNA pool. Our methodology allows users to utilize currently available methodologies for integrating cross-experiment microarray datasets and allow for the construction of large-cohort retrospective studies.To explore the performance of aRrayLasso, we began by comparing our methods ability to predict expression to the biological variation between replicates on the same platform. We assessed the degree to which aRrayLasso could accurately predict platform interconversions in three datasets, representative of different experimental systems, organisms and platforms. For the five platforms tested, aRrayLasso predictions are within the technical variation of each microarray platform when compared with technical replicates from the same cDNA pool, even when subjected to multiple sequential conversions (Supplementary). In addition, once built, aRrayLasso models can be used between experimental conditions: using the models built on GSE6313, we predicted expression levels in GSE4854 with no significant loss of signal (Pearsons product-moment correlation, P 0.38). While the results presented here do not guarantee similar results for all training and testing datasets, these analyses serve as a promising proof of concept. Furthermore, our success with a relatively small dataset suggests that aRrayLasso may reach even higher levels of performance as the size of the datasets involved increases.Implementation: In this investigation, we propose a data-driven method for integrating across high-throughput genomic measurement modalities that avoids the use of annotation-or sequence alignment-based tools. We have implemented a Lasso regressionbased modeling approach to model the expression level of each sequence tag in a target microarray as a linear combination of all sequence tags in a source microarray. Our implementation represents a straightforward, easy-to-use and open-source methodology for conversion between microarray platforms. Limitations: One drawback of our method is the need for extant or newly generated matched samples in the source and target platforms. In our experience, however, there are a large number of datasets available that have matched samples with replicates for a number of popular microarray platforms. A second limitation to our method is in conversion which lack overlap in gene coverage. In these cases, as with currently available methodologies, our method will fail to provide meaningful conversions. Lastly, while we have shown in one case that interexperiment conversions are feasible, we caution that systematic technical error in a single experiment may lead to the creation of a biased model. In general, however, when coupled with one of several cross-experiment dataset integration tools, aRrayLasso will enable mining of the remarkable and untapped historical pool of microarray datasets for large-scale metastudies for well-powered discovery.Systems biology in drug safety and metabolism: integration of microarray, real-time PCR and enzyme approaches. Pharmacogenomics, 6, 185192. 
