VARiD: A variation detection framework for color-space and letter-space platforms Motivation: High-throughput sequencing (HTS) technologies are transforming the study of genomic variation. The various HTS technologies have different sequencing biases and error rates, and while most HTS technologies sequence the residues of the genome directly, generating base calls for each position, the Applied Biosystems SOLiD platform generates dibase-coded (color space) sequences. While combining data from the various platforms should increase the accuracy of variation detection, to date there are only a few tools that can identify variants from color space data, and none that can analyze color space and regular (letter space) data together. Results: We present VARiDa probabilistic method for variation detection from both letter-and color-space reads simultaneously. VARiD is based on a hidden Markov model and uses the forward-backward algorithm to accurately identify heterozygous, homozygous and tri-allelic SNPs, as well as micro-indels. Our analysis shows that VARiD performs better than the AB SOLiD toolset at detecting variants from color-space data alone, and improves the calls dramatically when letter-and color-space reads are combined. Availability: The toolset is freely available atHigh-throughput sequencing (HTS) technologies are revolutionizing the way biologists acquire and analyze genomic data. HTS machines, such as 454/Roche, Illumina/Solexa and AB SOLiD are able to sequence up to a full human genome per week, at a cost hundreds fold less than previous methods. The resulting data consists of reads ranging in length between 35 and 400 nt, from unknown locations in the genome. Analysis of these datasets poses an unprecedented informatics challenge due to the sheer number of reads that a single run of an HTS machine can produce, the shortness of the reads, and the various technologies different sequencing biases and error rates. The two basic steps in the discovery of variants in the human population from reads coming from any of these technologies are: first, the mapping of reads to a finished (reference) genome, and second the identification of variation by analysis of these mappings. In the last few years, there have been many approaches proposed for mapping reads from HTS technologies (among many others; see To whom correspondence should be addressed.(b) show the correspondence between di-nucleotides and their color space representation with a translation matrix and the corresponding Finite State Automaton. In part (c), we show the effect of SNPs on the color-space representation of the read, as well as effect of sequencing errors on the trivial translation of the read from color to letter space. The first letter shown in the reads is actually the last letter of the linker, which helps us lock-in on one of the four possible translations of a color-space read.for reviews) that utilize a wide variety of approaches. Compared to this multitude of mapping tools, there have only been a handful of toolsets for single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) and small (15 bp) indel discovery. The main challenge in detecting these variants is using the error rates of the sequencing platform, the potentially incorrect mappings, and the varying coverage to determine the likelihood that a position represents a heterozygous or homozygous variant with respect to some reference genome. We use the term heterozygous to refer to the case when a single donor allele differs from the reference, and homozygous to refer to the case when both donor alleles differ from the reference, and are the same as each other. Tri-allelic SNPs, when the two donor alleles differ from each other and from the reference,Page: i344 i343i349To test VARiD, we utilized the dataset of, who sequenced several regions of the human genome, spanning a total of 260 kb, from four individuals (NA17156, NA17275, NA17460 and NA17773), both with the AB SOLiD platform and the 454/Roche Pyrosequencer. To validate the SNP calls, the authors also resequenced 80 kb from the same regions with Sanger sequencing. From the original high-coverage datasets, we generated reduced coverage, randomly selected subsets from the individuals with different degrees of coverage. To analyze the AB SOLiD data we ran the SOLiD System Analysis Pipeline Tool (Corona Lite 4.2.2 with the 35_3 schema) on the color-space data, as well as VARiD with both the AB Pipeline mappings as well as SHRiMP mappings, for all of the read subsets. For the 454 data, we ran VARiD and gigaBayes on the letterspace reads (using Mosaik and SHRiMP as the mapping tools). Finally, we tested our prediction pipeline on various color-and letterspace subsets combined. We compared the variants called by each method with the Sanger validation set to compute the following statistics:@BULLET Number of true positive (TP): SNPs that the predictor detects that are also in the validation set;@BULLET Number of false positive (FP): SNPs the predictor calls variant that are not in the validation set;@BULLET Precision: the number of true positives as a fraction of all predictions, 100 TP/(TP+FP);@BULLET Recall: the fraction of true positives as a fraction of the validated SNPs, 100 TP/(TP+FN); @BULLET F-measure: the harmonic mean of precision (P) and recall (R):The results of our analysis are illustrated in10, where we present results of color space only, results of letter space only and results for combinations of the two sequence types, respectively. In, we present results from variation identification with VARiD and the Corona Lite SNP caller (http://www.solidsoftwaretools.com/gf/project/mapreads) using the color-space data. We ran VARiD both with the alignments produced i347sections, we ran VARiD on various datasets aligned with the SHRiMP tool, in the second we ran it with AB mapper output and finally in the third we ran the Corona Lite pipeline on the AB mappings. In general, the results show that variation detection is difficult even with high coverage of color space, and the results are dependent on the coverage and the mapping package usedfor example, VARiD with SHRiMP mappings tends to have slightly lower precision, but higher recall, leading to higher F-measure scores, especially at lower coverages, while VARiD with AB mappings has higher precision, but also lower recall., for example, we can look at combining 50 of AB SOLiD color-space data with 5 of 454/Roche data. Comparing to the equivalent cost of 454/Roche (10) we achieve 7 more precision and 9 higher recall in the combined run. Similarly, comparing to the equivalent cost of AB SOLiD color-space data (100), we obtain 6 better precision and 3 better recall. Another example can be found by looking at the CS-100 and LS-10 combination, and comparing with 200 of CS or 20 of LS in Figures 8 and 9.The various HTS technologies that have emerged in the past few years have different data representations, advantages, biases and features. In this work, we introduced a novel probabilistic framework for variation identification, which can use both letter-and colorspace data simultaneously. We have shown in our results that when using only color-space dataa data type for which very few genomic analysis tools existthe model outperforms the AB SOLiD toolkit Corona Lite, and performs on par with gigaBayes predictions for letter-space data alone. More importantly, when the color-and letter-space data are combined, the VARiD framework allows for a significant performance increase, demonstrating that a method that can take into consideration multiple technologies, combining their different advantages and compensating for their different weaknesses can achieve higher accuracy variant predictions than are possible from any single data type. 
