VarSim: a high-fidelity simulation and validation framework for high-throughput genome sequencing with cancer applications VarSim is a framework for assessing alignment and variant calling accuracy in high-throughput genome sequencing through simulation or real data. In contrast to simulating a random mutation spectrum, it synthesizes diploid genomes with germline and somatic mutations based on a realistic model. This model leverages information such as previously reported mutations to make the synthetic genomes biologically relevant. VarSim simulates and validates a wide range of variants, including single nucleotide variants, small indels and large structural variants. It is an automated, comprehensive compute framework supporting parallel computation and multiple read simulators. Furthermore, we developed a novel map data structure to validate read alignments, a strategy to compare variants binned in size ranges and a lightweight, interactive, graphical report to visualize validation results with detailed statistics. Thus far, it is the most comprehensive validation tool for secondary analysis in next generation sequencing. Availability and implementation: Code in Java and Python along with instructions to download the reads and variants is atDue to the lack of ground truth for real data, simulation is a common approach for the evaluation of high-throughput sequencings secondary analysis, ranging from alignment to variant calling. An early attempt to perform validation without simulation is given in. However, their attempt involved extensive biological experiments and does not cover the full spectrum of variants.We present the first integrated pipeline that provides complete validation of secondary analysis through simulation as well as analysis with real data. Most tools simulate variants, but no single tool simulates the full spectrum of variants from small variants to all types of structural variations (SVs). RSVSim (We demonstrated VarSims completeness in both simulation and validation by simulating NA12878s personal genome with small variants from genome in a bottle (GiaB) high-confidence regions , and with SVs from 1000 genomes and DGV . Reads were generated at 50 coverage. The accuracy on the simulated reads was similar to the accuracy from the Illumina platinum genome reads of NA12878 (see Supplementary methods).and b present some benchmarking results on SNVs and small deletions. For all variant calling comparisons we used the alignments from BWAMEM after realignment and recalibration with GATK unless otherwise specified. Novoaligns alignments were used directly as input to Haplotype Caller without realignment and recalibration as recommended by the authors. In this case, Novoalign performed slightly worse in comparison to BWA-MEM. For small deletions, Haplotype Caller performed the best when compared to both Unified Genotyper and FreeBayes , especially for larger deletions. The results on SV deletions from several popular SV calling tools are shown in. The three tools represented three different methods for SV callingsplit-read, read-depth and paired-end. All tools performed well for moderatesized deletion SVs. Only BreakDancer (paired-end mapping) was able to recover larger SV deletions. However, it was not able to recover exact breakpoints. All tools failed to adequately recover deletion SVs in the smaller range. When comparing somatic analysis tools MuTect was superior to the other tools, especially when the tumor allele frequency was low. Additional analysis of secondary and somatic analysis tools based on the simulated NA12878 genome are provided in the Supplementary Material. 
