VisualCNA: a GUI for interactive constraint network analysis and protein engineering for improving thermostability Constraint network analysis (CNA) is a graph theory-based rigidity analysis approach for linking a biomolecules structure, flexibility, (thermo)stability and function. Results from CNA are highly information-rich and require intuitive, synchronized and interactive visualization for a comprehensive analysis. We developed VisualCNA, an easy-to-use PyMOL plug-in that allows setup of CNA runs and analysis of CNA results linking plots with molecular graphics representations. From a practical viewpoint, the most striking feature of VisualCNA is that it facilitates interactive protein engineering aimed at improving thermostability. Availability and Implementation: VisualCNA and its dependencies (CNA and FIRST software) are available free of charge under GPL and academic licenses, respectively. VisualCNA and CNA are available atStructural flexibility (and rigidity) is important for a proteins function and stability. Being able to accurately predict protein flexibility is thus instrumental in protein-science and-engineering as well as drug design. Our group developed the Python-based software package Constraint Network Analysis (CNA) (,b) for characterizing biomolecular flexibility both at the global and residue level. CNA functions as a front-and back-end to the graph theorybased rigidity analysis software Floppy Inclusions and Rigid Substructure Topography (FIRST) and has been used to predict protein thermostability, identify structural weak spots , and link protein flexibility and function, including allosteric regulation (C. Pfleger and H. Gohlke, unpublished results). CNA models a protein as a body-and-bar constraint network in which bodies (atoms) are connected by bars (covalent and non-covalent interactions). A rigidity analysis is then performed using the pebble game algorithm , resulting in a decomposition of the network into rigid and flexible regions. By removing non-covalent constraints from the network in the order of increasing strength, CNA simulates thermal unfolding. From the unfolding trajectory, CNA calculates several global and local flexibility indices . From the global indices, phase transition points are identified at which the network switches from rigid to flexible. These points are used to predict the thermostability of a protein and identify structural weak spots. Local indices describe intrinsic biomolecular flexibility at the level of bonds and can be compared with quantitative data from experiments on biomolecular mobility. The output from CNA is highly information-rich. For a comprehensive analysis, the data needs to be visualized as plots (showing global and local flexibility indices) as well as 3D graphics representations of the biomolecule, the constraint network, and the decomposition into rigid and flexible regions. Furthermore, the speed of CNA allows performing real-time rigidity analyses on biomolecules.Thus, interactive structural modifications and/or editing of the constraint network followed by a re-analysis of the biomolecules flexibility can be performed iteratively. With this in mind, we developed VisualCNA, an intuitive, easy-to-use graphical interface for CNA built as a plug-in for the molecular viewer PyMOL (The PyMOL Molecular Graphics System, Version 1.5.0.3 Schr dinger, LLC). VisualCNA supports scientists interested in the rigidity analysis of biomolecules by a synchronized and interactive visualization of the CNA output. It also enables interactive protein engineering for improving thermostability by iteratively mutating identified weak spots, performing a subsequent rigidity analysis, and automatically comparing CNA output from wild-type and mutant structures. 
