Genome analysis Artemis: an integrated platform for visualization and analysis of high-throughput sequence-based experimental data Motivation: High-throughput sequencing (HTS) technologies have made low-cost sequencing of large numbers of samples commonplace. An explosion in the type, not just number, of sequencing experiments has also taken place including genome re-sequencing, population-scale variation detection, whole transcriptome sequencing and genome-wide analysis of protein-bound nucleic acids. Results: We present Artemis as a tool for integrated visualization and computational analysis of different types of HTS datasets in the context of a reference genome and its corresponding annotation. Availability: Artemis is freely available (under a GPL licence) for download (for MacOSX, UNIX and Windows) at the Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute websites:Prior to the advent of high-throughput sequencing (HTS), sequencing experiments were limited by cost to the study of a single sample or a small number of important samples. However, the recent advances in DNA sequencing technologies have made it possible for researchers to quickly and inexpensively sequence very large numbers of samples and to conduct many new types of sequencing-based experiments. For example, HTS has been used to study transmission using a large number of isolates of a methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) on both the global and local scale . It has also been used to show that homologous recombination has led to serotype switching and vaccine escape in a study of 240 isolates of Streptococcus pneumoniae PMEN1 . HTS has made it possible to explore population genetic variation among human populations (1000). We are now increasingly using it to enhance our understanding of how genetic differences affect health and disease . The aim of projects, such as the UK10K (http://www.uk10k.org), is to construct detailed catalogues of genome variations and identify many more low-frequency variants that may be associated with susceptibility to disease and response to pathogens, drugs and vaccines. These applications of HTS require the identification of To whom correspondence should be addressed. single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) as well as insertions and deletions. In addition to indels, HTS can be used to identify large structural variants, such as large insertions, deletions, inversions and duplications. Structural variations are also likely to make an important contribution to diversity and disease susceptibility . The study of functional genomics and quantitative gene expression studies has greatly benefited from RNA-seq experiments, which have refined our understanding of expression and significantly improved annotation . The sheer size of the datasets from HTS experiments requires tools to visualize, analyse, summarize and interpret these largescale datasets. Many new algorithms and tools have been developed to efficiently process and analyse the data such as those designed to assemble sequences into a consensus, e.g. Velvet , ABySS , map or align short reads against a reference sequence e.g. TopHat , BowTie , BWA or those designed to identify sequence variations e.g. SAMtools, GATK . However an inspection, review and interpretation of the output by an experienced and knowledgeable person is essential to understand the genomic context of these datasets and can be critical to make connections between sequence variation and biological phenomena. This of course complements computational approaches, because a visual examination of the results and underlying data is often the next step in order to confirm a prediction, or assess the potential functional effects in a sequence-based experiment. A number of new software applications have been developed for browsing, visualizing and interpreting large-scale sequencing datasets. Several of these have been designed specifically for the visualization of genome sequence assemblies, including EagleView , HawkEye and Tablet . Other tools, such as LookSeq and BamView have been developed specifically to visualize short-read alignment data. LookSeq is a JavaScript-based web application that displays data stored in BAM files. BamView is an interactive Java application that can visualize large numbers of read alignments stored in BAM files. However, often researchers need to visualize these read alignments in the context of genome annotation. Genome browsers including Integrative Genome Viewer (IGV,), Integrated Genome Browser (IGB,) and GenoViewer (http://www.genoviewer.com), have beenPage: 465 464469Artemis, traditionally a genome visualization and annotation tool, has recently been extended and enhanced with a wealth of new features and functionality to support the visualization and analysis of HTS datasets in the context of the genome sequence and annotation. BamView was originally developed as a stand-alone application to visualize read alignments stored as binary versions of SAM (Sequence Alignment/Map) files and known as BAM files . BamView was subsequently incorporated into Artemis, providing the functionality to view these read alignments in the context of the nucleotide sequence and genomic features. Reads can be displayed in one of five views, aimed at emphasizing different aspects of alignments: stacked, paired-stacked, strand stacked, inferred size and coverage view . It is possible to zoom in and view the read alignments at the nucleotide level . Reads can be filtered by their mapping quality and/or by their SAM flags. Also the panel can be cloned, so that separate views can be shown which is useful when comparing multiple strains for example. In addition, functionality has been added to display the contents of Variant Call Format (VCF,) files. VCF files are compressed and indexed with bgzip and tabix , respectively. Alternatively binary VCF (BCF) can be used, which are generated and indexed, using BCFtools(http://samtools.sourceforge.net/mpileup.shtml). Variants stored in these files are rendered in the VCF view allowing the user to visually inspect the variant calls against the reference sequence and annotation . Artemis can access the BAM and VCF and the associated index files from a local file system or remotely over HTTP and FTP. Furthermore, filtering mechanisms have been added to Artemis to allow users to filter variants in real time. The filter can be based on the type of variant (e.g. synonymous, non-synonymous, insertions) or on the properties present in the VCF file such as read depth and mapping quality. These variants can also be automatically annotated according to variant type, including synonymous SNPs, non-synonymous SNPs, insertion, deletion and multiple allele.in the reference strain (and one of the other strains). The gene has independently become a pseudogene in a second strain, because of an SNP leading to a premature stop codon (as indicated by the circle in the middle of the line), and a third strain has a recombination that spans this whole region (shown by the increased SNP density). Artemis can be used for the initial data exploration of HTS datasets, cross checking of results and for small to medium size genomes it provides a limited set of analyses. This includes calculation of SNP density, read counts and the reads per kilobase per million mapped reads (RPKM,) for selected genes. The read count results can be saved in a tab delimited format file. These results can be used as input to DESeq , for example, for additional differential expression analysis. Finally, to display other experimental datasets (e.g. microarray, RNA-Seq) it now has support for user-defined input types, which can be rendered graphically as either graphs or heat maps. In the following sections, we describe these new features in more detail and outline how Artemis can be used in several different HTS experiments as a platform for interrogating, analysing, and interpreting these data.In this article, we have described Artemis, an integrated genome visualization and analysis platform for HTS datasets. We have presented several example datasets and discussed the role of Artemis in their visualization and interpretation. Further examples are available on the Artemis website http://www.sanger.ac.uk/resources/ software/artemis/ngs/. Artemis has support for various standard file formats including BAM and VCF, in addition to user-defined input files. These formats can support data from many different types of sequencing platforms. Therefore, Artemis has the potential to visualize and investigate sequencing data from numerous sequencing technologies. The new views available within Artemis are easily customizable by the user and can be viewed at different levels of resolution. Multiple BAMs and VCFs can be loaded simultaneously for comparison. This allows in-depth preliminary analysis and investigations of HTS datasets in the context of the sequence and annotation of a reference to reveal biologically relevant information. Using indexed files (BAM, VCF, BCF and FASTA) means that Artemis can efficiently manage memory by only needing to load into memory the data that is currently being displayed in the interface. This improves the performance and enables large genomes to be viewed and interpreted along with large HTS datasets. 
