Data and text mining Web-based Gene Pathogenicity Analysis (WGPA): a web platform to interpret gene pathogenicity from personal genome data As the volume of patient-specific genome sequences increases the focus of biomedical research is switching from the detection of disease-mutations to their interpretation. To this end a number of techniques have been developed that use mutation data collected within a population to predict whether individual genes are likely to be disease-causing or not. As both sequence data and associated analysis tools proliferate, it becomes increasingly difficult for the community to make sense of these data and their implications. Moreover, no single analysis tool is likely to capture all relevant genomic features that contribute to the genes pathogenicity. Here, we introduce Web-based Gene Pathogenicity Analysis (WGPA), a web-based tool to analyze genes impacted by mutations and rank them through the integration of existing prioritization tools, which assess different aspects of gene pathogenicity using population-level sequence data. Additionally, to explore the polygenic contribution of mutations to disease, WGPA implements gene set enrichment analysis to prioritize disease-causing genes and gene interaction networks, therefore providing a comprehensive annotation of personal genomes data in disease.With the growing volume of patient-specific sequences that is being generated there is an increasing need to annotate these data and distinguish possible disease causing mutations from benign mutations. To this end, a number of approaches have been developed to prioritize genes based on their predicted pathogenicity using wholeexome and whole-genome data. A recently introduced class of approaches use the pattern of functional sequence variation (i.e. rare and common mutations) observed in the human population , the likelihood of observed mutations according to evolution or statistical modelling of genes under selective constraint to prioritize (rank) diseasecausing genes from sets of genes impacted by mutations. Differently from sequence variant-level analysis (e.g. PolyPhen2 , these methods specifically allow a gene-level analysis of pathogenicity, providing elegant, yet distinct schemes to evaluate the significance for individual genes in disease . Here we provide an easy to use web-based tool (Webbased Gene Pathogenicity Analysis or WGPA) that integrates these methods for gene-level pathogenicity analysis as well as any future scoring system, therefore facilitating the assessment of the evidence 
