Structural bioinformatics WhichCyp: prediction of cytochromes P450 inhibition In this work we present WhichCyp, a tool for prediction of which cytochromes P450 isoforms (among 1A2, 2C9, 2C19, 2D6 and 3A4) a given molecule is likely to inhibit. The models are built from experimental high-throughput data using support vector machines and molecular signatures. Availability: The WhichCyp server is freely available for use on the web at http://drug.ku.dk/whichcyp, where the WhichCyp Java program and source code is also available for download.The cytochromes P450 (CYP) is a ubiquitous enzyme family found throughout the nature. These enzymes are involved in the metabolism of a large majority of the drugs in use today . Modeling of their interactions with druglike compounds have been a hot topic during the past decade, stretching from quantum mechanical studies of reaction mechanisms to data mining approaches and QSAR studies . The five most important human CYP isoforms, with regard to drug metabolism, are 1A2, 2C9, 2C19, 2D6 and 3A4 . In 2009, a large high-throughput study of inhibition to these isoforms was performed , enabling the application of machine learning techniques to the classification of CYP inhibitors. Such classification models are important for the prediction of drugdrug interactions. In this work, we present WhichCyp, a publically available software and web server for prediction of CYP inhibitors built from these data.We investigated signatures with different heights, ranging from 0 to 4, and combinations thereof. The most successful combinations were combinations of heights 03, results for which are shown in. Combinations of signature heights for the ranges 02 and 04 gave similar results, but with slightly worse area under curve (AUC) values for almost all models (Supplementary Material). The final models give accurate predictions with AUC values ranging from 0.88 to 0.95, and even sensitivity and specificity for all models except the one for 2D6 (due to the unbalanced dataset). These results are improvements compared with earlier studies, in which combined classifiers using fingerprints resulted in AUC values of 0.81, To whom correspondence should be addressed. The Author 2013. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com 0.86, 0.84, 0.88, 0.79 and 264 molecular descriptors in values of 0.93, 0.89, 0.89, 0.85, 0.87 for isoforms 1A2, 2C9, 2C19, 2D6 and 3A4, respectively. Other approaches that have been used were discussed in a recent review . To investigate if we could determine an applicability domain type measure, we studied the relation between the number of signatures for the compounds in the test sets that did not exist in the training set, and the performance of the models. It was found that the number of missing signatures of height three (Supplementary Figs S1S5) could be used as an estimation of the likelihood that the model performs well, and that the sensitivity was the first measure to drop (among sensitivity, specificity and prediction accuracy). 
