Data and text mining Which species is it? Species-driven gene name disambiguation using random walks over a mixture of adjacency matrices Motivation: The scientific literature contains a wealth of information about biological systems. Manual curation lacks the scalability to extract this information due to the ever-increasing numbers of papers being published. The development and application of text mining technologies has been proposed as a way of dealing with this problem. However, the inter-species ambiguity of the genomic nomenclature makes mapping of gene mentions identified in text to their corresponding Entrez gene identifiers an extremely difficult task. We propose a novel method, which transforms a MEDLINE record into a mixture of adjacency matrices; by performing a random walkover the resulting graph, we can perform multi-class supervised classification allowing the assignment of taxonomy identifiers to individual gene mentions. The ability to achieve good performance at this task has a direct impact on the performance of normalizing gene mentions to Entrez gene identifiers. Such graph mixtures add flexibility and allow us to generate probabilistic classification schemes that naturally reflect the uncertainties inherent, even in literature-derived data. Results: Our method performs well in terms of both micro-and macro-averaged performance, achieving micro-F 1 of 0.76 and macro-F 1 of 0.36 on the publicly available DECA corpus. Re-curation of the DECA corpus was performed, with our method achieving 0.88 micro-F 1 and 0.51 macro-F 1. Our method improves over standard classification techniques [such as support vector machines (SVMs)] in a number of ways: flexibility, interpretability and its resistance to the effects of class bias in the training data. Good performance is achieved without the need for computationally expensive parse tree generation or bag of words classification.The scientific literature contains a wealth of information about biological organisms that is relevant for biomedical scientists: from descriptions of proteinprotein interactions (PPIs) To whom correspondence should be addressed. to parameters for models of biological systems . The ever-increasing publication rate now means that it has become impossible for manual curators to extract this information comprehensively. This situation has led to a sustained interest in the development and application of text mining (TM) methods to the biological and biomedical domain . Many organisms are used to investigate biological processes and phenomena with the expectation that any understanding obtained can be applied to other organisms (e.g. the zebrafish immune system is used as a model of the human immune system). However, in some cases this mapping of experimental results is not justified due to inter-species variation (i.e. a protein may be subject to neo/subfunctionalization), which could lead to erroneous inferences being drawn. Therefore, it is important to identify the species to which any genes (and other entities of interest) mentioned in a paper belong, and in which species the experiments were performed in order to reduce the chances of this kind of mistake occurring. Here, we provide a new method that is able to achieve this automatically embedded in a TM framework. A typical TM pipeline works by first recognizing or tagging named entities (NEs) of interest (e.g. gene mentions or species mentions) in a block of text and then normalizing or mapping these mentions to canonical unique identifiers (e.g. Entrez gene identifiers or NCBI Taxonomy identifiers). This normalization process facilitates summarizing and integration of results obtained using TM with other types of biological knowledge. However, the ambiguity and variability of the genomic nomenclature makes this task extremely challenging. A single gene mention can potentially refer to many genes within a species or across species. The inter-species ambiguity of the genomic nomenclature means that identifying the correct species of a gene mention is an important subtask of gene normalization , but despite of this there has been only limited work in this area.investigated methods to identify the focal organisms of an abstract using a custom species tagger and various heuristics. This work showed that identifying the species mentioned in an abstract was beneficial both for gene normalization and PPI extraction. Genes from several species can be mentioned in a single article (e.g. an article on evolutionary analysis of a gene may refer to its homologues in multiple species) so it is important to perform species disambiguation at the level of an individual gene mention. Not performing species-driven gene name disambiguation led to poor performance in the BioCreative (BC)Page: 255 254260Our method was evaluated using 5-fold cross-validation over the DECA corpus. We assume that gene mentions are provided and the aim is to assign a single taxonomy identifier to individual gene mentions. We calculated the micro-precision, micro-recall, microF1, macro-precision, macro-recall and macro-F1 over the different versions of the DECA corpus. Precision is calculated as the total number of correctly assigned gene mentiontaxonomy identifier pairs divided by the total number of assigned pairs. Recall is calculated as the total number of correctly assigned gene mentiontaxonomy identifier pairs divided by the total number of pairs annotated in the corpus. F 1 is the unweighted harmonic mean of precision and recall. Micro-averaged metrics are calculated globally over all potential classes. These metrics provide a measure of how well our method is doing over all the instances in the corpus. However, training data for multi-classification tasks can exhibit a class bias, where certain classes are over-represented. This can lead to high micro-averaged performance as the method may work well on the classes with a large number of instances, but the method may show poor performance on rarer classes with few or no instances in the training set. Macro-averaged metrics provide measures where this class bias is taken into consideration by explicitly assuming that the class sizes are equal. This is achieved by taking the mean of the desired performance metric over the potential classes. Methods that report high micro-average and low macro-average performance suggest that the method is susceptible to local over-fitting. Our method performs well compared to the current state-of-theart methods reported previously by, in terms of both macro-and micro-averaged metrics . Randomization testing was performed and the method was found by significantly outperforming the previously reported ML method in terms of macro-averaged performance and the RELATION method in terms of both macro-and micro-averaged performance . In comparison to the method in, which only used a species tagger and prefix resolution system, using a different species tagger and additionally using cell lines and MeSH terms as extra sources of evidence was found to improve overall performance. A number of abstracts contain no species mentions and the only clue with regard to the species is the assigned MeSH terms. If MeSH terms were not used in the model, the micro-averaged F 1 would decrease to 0.7344 and 0.7572, for corpus A 2 and B, respectively [we note that our method resolves many more species than the method ofand hence a decrease in micro-averages is expected]. Not including cell line mentions in the evaluation resulted in a decrease to 0.8459 and 0.8840 for corpus A 2 and B in terms on F 1. This shows that in addition to identifying species names, using other sources of evidence improves the overall performance. Our method enables the integration of these additional sources of evidence in a coherent and easily understandable manner.Values inside brackets show the range of the performance measure over the 5-folds. A 1 shows the performance of the method using the species words identified by the NaCTeM Species Word Detector. A 2 using our custom species word detection and normalization component.Unlike other classification (e.g. SVMs) approaches, our method does not provide a hard classification (yes/no) and instead provides a probability associated with each classification it makes. This probability reflects both the uncertainty in assigning a species word to a gene mention, and in the normalization of a species word to an NCBI taxonomy identifier, allowing uncertainty to be propagated. Thus, the reliability of the proposed species identifier can be assessed directly, and we do not artificially inflate confidence in a given classification. Where there is insufficient evidence in the abstract to distinguish between the species of an entity, a Maximum Entropy (MaxEnt) approach is followed where all potential taxonomy identifiers are assigned a uniform probability (no classification is made). Like the relation method proposed by, our method does not require separate training data for each class/species and instead assumes that authors propose the species of an entity in a uniform manner over all species. The method is conceptually similar to construction-integration model proposed by Kintsch (1988).In the absence of any species words, it is not possible to propose a taxonomy identifier for any gene mentions within that abstract. In future, it may be possible to use an imputation step where we could probabilistically assign an identifier based on the frequency of species in PubMed, or by looking at its candidates in BioThesaurus and assigning a uniform probability over all potential taxonomy identifiers. The performance of any species disambiguation method is highly dependent on the performance of the components responsible for tagging and normalizing species words. Here, we used both the NaCTeM Species Word Detector and the LINNAEUS tagger for species named entity recognition (NER), and any publicly available/custom-built species tagger could be used [e.g. TaxonGrab or the OrganismTagger (. One of the issues with species name identification is that authors can use the genus name as shorthand for the species name. Performance of the method would improve if genus names were identified and normalized to the major model organism in that genus [e.g. identifying and normalising Arabidopsis to Arabidopsis thalianaOur method performs well in terms of both macro-and microaveraged performance of previous methods and shows significant improvements over the RELATION method proposed by. Most importantly, our approach, once the reliable Page: 260 254260 
