Data and text mining ASSIsT: an automatic SNP scoring tool for in-and outbreeding species ASSIsT (Automatic SNP ScorIng Tool) is a user-friendly customized pipeline for efficient calling and filtering of SNPs from Illumina Infinium arrays, specifically devised for custom genotyping arrays. Illumina has developed an integrated software for SNP data visualization and inspection called GenomeStudio V R (GS). ASSIsT builds on GS-derived data and identifies those markers that follow a bi-allelic genetic model and show reliable genotype calls. Moreover, ASSIsT re-edits SNP calls with null alleles or additional SNPs in the probe annealing site. ASSIsT can be employed in the analysis of different population types such as full-sib families and mating schemes used in the plant kingdom (backcross, F1, F2), and unrelated individuals. The final result can be directly exported in the format required by the most common software for genetic mapping and markertrait association analysis. ASSIsT is developed in Python and runs in Windows and Linux. Availability and implementation: The software, example data sets and tutorials are freely available at http://compbiotoolbox.fmach.it/assist/.Advances in whole genome genotyping technologies enabled the investigation of several hundred thousand SNP markers simultaneously on a genome-wide scale. To date, Illumina (GoldenGate V R and Infinium V R ) and Affimetrix (Axiom V R ) are the most widely used array-based genotyping platforms worldwide. Illumina has developed GenomeStudio V R , a proprietary software with a graphical user interface (GUI) for SNP data visualization and filtering that enables the selection of high-quality markers showing robust performance across the examined germplasm. However, the actual filtering of such SNPs requires a deep understanding of the performance of SNP markers, genetic segregation patterns and familiarity with the many tools and parameters in GenomeStudio V R (GS). ASSIsT accounts for this by offering a user friendly, automated pipeline that builds on the results of Illuminas GenCall algorithm as incorporated in GS. In addition to filtering, ASSIsT also re-edits GS-calls in order to better explore the available information for SNPs showing null alleles or additional SNP clusters V R due to additional polymorphisms at the probe annealing site. This re-editing enhances correct SNP calling and reduces unnecessary removal of potentially valuable markers.ASSIsT supports the analyses of different population types, such as full-sib families (e.g. human, livestock, cross pollinating plants), mating schemes common in plants (backcross, F1, F2) and individuals with unknown genetic relationships. ASSIsTs GUI allows easy parameter setting and provides a visual output of the SNP clustering analysis. The results produced by ASSIsT can be directly exported to the input format of the most widely used software for genetic and marker-trait association analysis (FlexQTL TM , GAPIT, JoinMap, PLINK, Structure and Tassel). This straightforward integration will improve marker performance in association and QTL mapping studies. ASSIsT is developed in Python (www.python.org). Its source code is released under the GNU General Public Licence (GNUGPLv3) to allow its integration into bioinformatic pipelines. ASSIsT requires three input files: a pedigree file in which the parents of each sample are reported and two standard report files from GS (Final Report and DNA Report). The two GS reports are standard output of commercial service companies; therefore, ASSIsT does not necessarily require access to GS. A map file with the genetic or physical position of the markers may also be included. This information is mandatory for exporting results in Structure or PLINK formats. ASSIsT allows pre-selection of the stringency of the filtering procedure by customizing the following parameters: (1) Proportion of missing data, (2) Call Rate threshold, (3) Segregation distortion (v 2 P-value), (4) Frequency of not allowed genotypes (structured germplasm) and (5) Minor Allele Frequency. The first step of the filtering analysis is a quality check of the individuals; samples with a high proportion of unexpected marker genotypes due to outcrossing, different ploidy levels and DNA admixture, among other causes, are considered deviating germplasm and further excluded from the analysis. Samples with poor DNA quality (call rate significantly lower than the average of the dataset) will not be considered in the analysis either. All discarded samples are listed in the summary output file. Only robust markers (i.e. those showing a clear cluster separation and few No Calls) are allowed through the initial filtering. These markers can show two (one homozygous and one heterozygous) or three clusters (two homozygous and one heterozygous). For some markers, the AB cluster might result in two distinct subclusters, due to additional SNPs at the probe site, which may lead to differential hybridization efficiency and to distinct classes of signal intensity within a marker allele. The variation in signal intensity, generally ignored by GS, is considered by ASSisT instead. For instance, a cross between two heterozygous parents generates three genotype clusters at a single locus (e.g. CT CT produces 
