AStream: an R package for annotating LC/MS metabolomic data AStream, an R-statistical software package for the curation and identification of feature peaks extracted from liquid chromatography mass spectrometry (LC/MS) metabolomics data, is described. AStream detects isotopic, fragment and adduct patterns by identifying feature pairs that fulfill expected relational patterns. Data reduction by AStream allows compounds to be identified reliably and subsequently linked to metabolite databases. AStream provides researchers with a fast, reliable tool for summarizing metabolomic data, notably reducing curation time and increasing consistency of results. Availability: The AStream R package and a study example can be freely accessed atRecent improvements in chromatographic technologies and spectrometry analysis techniques have increased the use of metabolomics for disease diagnosis and in systems biology . Liquid chromatography mass spectrometry (LC/MS) is a powerful and widely used method for identifying and quantifying metabolites in biological samples. After applying a data pre-processing algorithm, a large set of feature peaks is usually obtained for each sample; each feature is characterized by a particular retention time, mass-to-charge (m/z) value and an intensity measurement that is correlated with the relative concentration of the particular metabolite. Bioinformatic methods such as XCMS can perform these complex pre-processing steps. However, once the set of feature peaks is obtained, a time-consuming and error-prone manual curation step is required, particularly when an untargeted metabolomic analysis needs to be performed. The main objectives of the curation step are to reduce redundancy between the various chemical forms detected in one compound (e.g. carbon isotopes, adducts, fragments) and to identify characteristics with a higher probability of being true biological features rather than being generated by noise artifacts or potential sample contamination. To whom correspondence should be addressed.AStream has been developed in order to facilitate the curation step of the analytical flow of metabolomic experiments. Using robust measures from relational patterns, AStream quickly identifies the set of metabolites that most reliably represents the metabolomic profile of each sample.Page: 1340 13391340An LC/MS dataset obtained from 20 human serum samples was used to evaluate AStream performance (Ibaez,L. and Correig,X., unpublished data). For illustration purposes, the samples were randomly assigned as n = 10 controls and n = 10 cases (of note, randomization does not influence AStream metabolite annotation, only the significance value for differential expression). After raw data processing analysis had been applied using the XCMS package, a total of n = 3148 features were generated. This pre-processed metabolomic dataset is included in the AStream library. Using this dataset, AStream was used to process the large feature list into a curated, non-redundant metabolite set. The quality control step allowed one serum sample to be identified displaying an outlying feature distribution and this was automatically discarded from further analyses (Supplementary). In addition, the observed retention time differences and correlation histograms of all feature pairs (Supplementary Material) were used to select the optimal feature pair selection thresholds. On the basis of this information, a maximum retention time difference of 3 s and a minimum correlation value of 0.75 were used in the present analysis (Supplementary Material and Supplementary Table S1).The final number of feature pairs passing the filters was n = 11 317 from a total of n = 4 953 378 possible pairs (i.e. 0.23). After the mass to charge ratio (m/z) tolerance for isotope and adduct searching was set to 3e-3 (according to the precision of the particular LC/MS equipment used), a total of 431 isotope patterns were obtained (Supplementaryand Supplementary). Of these 431 isotope patterns, 68 patterns were linked to other features corresponding to different adducts present in the samples (Supplementary). In the final curated set of metabolomic compounds generated by AStream (Supplementary) all features were characterized by a minimum of two isotopic peaks , thereby increasing confidence in the metabolite annotation. In conclusion, applying AStream to the present dataset resulted in a 7-fold reduction (i.e. from n = 3148 features to n = 431 annotated compounds) in the number of metabolite features. Importantly, this non-redundant set of features fulfilled the expected relational patterns associated with LC/MS analysis and had an increased probability of being true positive signals. AStream allows researchers interested in performing LC/MS metabolomic studies to use a practical and robust tool for analyzing data obtained from this type of experiment. 
