A subspace method for the detection of transcription factor binding sites Motivation: The identification of the sites at which transcription factors (TFs) bind to Deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) is an important problem in molecular biology. Many computational methods have been developed for motif finding, most of them based on position-specific scoring matrices (PSSMs) which assume the independence of positions within a binding site. However, some experimental and computational studies demonstrate that interdependences within the positions exist. Results: In this article, we introduce a novel motif finding method which constructs a subspace based on the covariance of numerical DNA sequences. When a candidate sequence is projected into the modeled subspace, a threshold in the Q-residuals confidence allows us to predict whether this sequence is a binding site. Using the TRANSFAC and JASPAR databases, we compared our Q-residuals detector with existing PSSM methods. In most of the studied TF binding sites, the Q-residuals detector performs significantly better and faster than MATCH and MAST. As compared with Motifscan, a method which takes into account interdependences, the performance of the Q-residuals detector is better when the number of available sequences is small. Availability: http://r-forge.r-project.org/projects/meet Contact:Deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) sequence motifs are short sequence patterns with biological function. In the gene promoter region, there are DNA sequence motifs which hint at the interaction between the gene regulation machinery and the nucleic acids. They are involved in several DNA and ribonucleic acid (RNA) processes, such as the binding of some proteins to DNA, the ribosome binding to mRNA, and mRNA processing (D). Protein biosynthesis starts with a transcription process. This process, for example in eukaryotes, is led by several types of RNA polymerase that require special DNA sequences in promoters and a set of transcription factor (TF) proteins. To whom correspondence should be addressed. Due to the importance of gene regulation, a major problem in molecular biology is to discover the location of the transcription factor binding sites (TFBSs) within the genome. But the fact that most TFs bind to short, degenerate sequences makes it difficult to find sequence patterns to model the binding sites . Many algorithms try to characterize these patterns, and such algorithms may be classified into consensus-based methods or alignment-based methods . Most of the algorithms developed target the location of TFBSs. These follow one of two strategies: (i) to discover common binding sites into a set of unaligned sequences of co-regulated genes and (ii) to make use of the previous knowledge of sequences to search for a motif within a genome . The algorithms which use the previous knowledge of the binding site sequences are mostly based on position-specific scoring matrices . PSSM are matrices of frequencies of each nucleotide in each position of the binding site. Some examples of these algorithms are MATCH , which uses information at each position to construct a PSSM; MAST , based on the QFAST algorithm and part of MEME suite ; rVISTA which uses evolutionary data; and ITEME which calculates the information loss of the binding sites. These models assume that the positions in binding sites are statistically independent. However, experimental evidence shows that TFBS have interdependences between positions and some computational studies suggest the same . These findings have motivated the development of new strategies which take into account position interdependences. Models based on Markov chains, such as WAM , are restricted to modeling interdependences between adjacent positions. Other algorithms estimate non-adjacent interdependences using permuted Markov models ; Bayesian networks ; variable order Bayesian networks or graphs . Detectors constructed using these techniques have higher accuracy, but require the tuning of many parameters for optimal operation which typically requires a large number of binding site instances. Additionally, most of these algorithms are computationally intensive. On the other hand, a large body of knowledge exists for specific event detection in numerical sequences (signals), and the conversionIn this section, we first present the results of the comparison between the Q-residuals detector, MATCH and MAST using the 112 motifspresented above and two different backgrounds for each organism. Then, we describe in more detail the comparison between MAST and Q-residuals, and show a study of the interdependences. We present an analysis of the computational time needed for each one of the studied detection algorithms, and finally we compare the Q-residuals detector to the results obtained with Motifscan. One example of detection can be seen in the cMyB motif in, a set of TFBSs for H.sapiens. The ROC curves show the performance of the three algorithms using the first background for H.sapiens. A significant improvement is observed when the Q-residuals detector is used in place of MAST or MATCH. To visualize the performance of the three different detectors in all the studied TFs,summarizes the results for Q-residuals, MATCH and MAST for the two different backgrounds in each organism for TRANSFAC. The best number of components (usually between 1 and 4) is shown, together with the mean AUC for each background and method. The results for all the studied TFs are available as Supplementary Material 2. To quantify the differences in performance between the Qresiduals detector and the other algorithms, a Wilcoxon rank-test was performed on the AUC distributions, using the null hypothesis that the two distributions are the same versus the alternative hypothesis that AUC using Q-residuals is closer to 1 than when MAST or MATCH are used. Inand the Supplementary Material 2, the increment in AUC and the significance of the test are displayed, and it can be seen that Q-residuals performs significantly better than Match in 57 of the 112 motifs studied and significantly better than MAST in 63 of them, with p-value 0.05. To better visualize the detectors, we present the AUC box plots in. These box plots represent the AUC and its variation when the L.O.O. is applied.shows the box-plots for the first background and the JASPAR motifs corresponding to M.musculus. In most cases, not only is the mean AUC closer to one in Q-residuals,. Results for Q-residuals detector compared with MATCH and MAST algorithms, corresponding to the two backgrounds of each organism in TRANSFAC. The AUC shown for each method is the mean of the areas using the cross-validation method and the number of principal components for Q-residuals is chosen as the number of components with less variance in the AUC. The AUC is the mean AUC improvement of Q-residuals versus MATCH and MAST, respectively. The level of significance corresponds to the p-value calculated when a Wilcoxon-rank test is performed, with the null hypothesis being that the AUC distributions using Q-residuals detector and the other algorithm are the same and the alternative hypothesis being that the AUC distributions calculated with the Q-residuals detector is closer to one. A description of the 89 JASPAR motifs and 23 TRANSFAC motifs can be found in the Supplementary Materialbut the variance is also smaller, which suggests that the Q-residuals algorithm behaves more robustly. An average of the PR curves obtained in each leave-one-out iteration is also presented as Supplementary Material 3, showing that, when these curves are used, the Q-residuals detector also performs better than the PSSM algorithms in most of the cases. The percentage of positions showing interdependences, I dep , varies among the studied binding sites as can be observed in. A correlation test was performed between the I dep and the improvement in binding site detection when Q-residuals detector was compared with MAST. The improvement in binding site detection was derived by subtracting the mean AUC for each binding site calculated using each method. Results show a significant correlation between the number of strong interdependent sites within a binding locus and the amount of improvement of the Q-residuals detector over MAST (as measured in terms of AUC). Performing the test on the results for JASPAR database gave a p-value = 0.004; the corresponding result for the TRANSFAC database was a p-value = 0.04. The computational times of the Q-residuals detector, of MAST and of our R implementation of MATCH were compared for the detection of TFBS within promoter sequences. To compare the three algorithms, the MAST algorithm (MEME version 4.4.0), the C code for Q-residuals using the ideal number of components, and our implementation of MATCH algorithm in R with the ideal Core Similarity were used. The background corresponded to Background 1 for each organismthis consisted of 1500 nucleotides. The threshold for each method was set in such a way that the number of positives was similar. In the case of MAST a p-value of p = 0.001 was chosen, for Q-residuals a confidence interval of C = 0.95 was set, and for MATCH the Similarity was set to S = 0.85. The time was calculated for 100 iterations of the program. The average computational time in detection for the TRANSFAC database motifs are 0.003 0.001 s using the Qresiduals detector, 0.0191 0.001 s using MAST and 0.33 0.03 s for the R implementation of MATCH. The results show that the Qresiduals detector is faster than MAST and the R implementation of MATCH in all the studied binding sites. The Q-residuals detector was also compared with Motifscan, an algorithm which takes into account interdependences. Using the same criteria as, a 5 increase in the ROC N AUC was required for an improvement to be considered significant. The results showed that in 34 of the 93 studied motifs Motifscan performs better than either the Q-residuals detector or the PSSMs methods, that Q-residuals is the best detector in 25 of the 93 motifs whereas PSSM is best in just 1 of them. The three detectors perform equally well inare better than Motifscan in 3 motifs; and Motifscan and PSSM are better than Q-residuals in 9 of the 93 motifs. The AUC performance is shown in the Supplementary Material 4. A visualization of the results inshows that the performance of Q-residuals is more sensitive to the number of positions. When the sequences are short, the number of false positives using the Q-residuals detector increases, leading to a smaller AUC. Motifscan performs better in this situation but, on the other hand, it needs more training sequences, so when the number of sequences is small, Q-residuals performs better than Motifscan. Focussing on the 37 motifs which have 20 sequences available, in 43.24 of the cases the AUC of Q-residuals shows it to be significantly the best algorithm, whereas Motifscan is best in just 27.02 of the instances. In most cases, even if Motifscan is significantly better than Q-residuals, the Q-residuals algorithm performs better than PSSM methods for this comparison also. 
