Systems biology A system-level approach for deciphering the transcriptional response to prion infection Motivation: Deciphering the response of a complex biological system to an insulting event, at the gene expression level, requires adopting theoretical models that are more sophisticated than a one-to-one comparison (i.e. t-test). Here, we investigate the ability of a novel reverse engineering approach (System Response Inference) to unveil non-obvious transcriptional signatures of the system response induced by prion infection. Results: To this end, we analyze previously published gene expression data, from which we extrapolate a putative full-scale model of transcriptional genegene dependencies in the mouse central nervous system. Then, we use this nominal model to interpret the gene expression changes caused by prion replication, aiming at selecting the genes primarily influenced by this perturbation. Our method sheds light on the mode of action of prions by identifying key transcripts that are the most likely to be responsible for the overall transcriptional rearrangement from a nominal regulatory network. As a first result of our inference, we have been able to predict known targets of prions (i.e. PrP C) and to unveil the potential role of previously unsuspected genes.A major challenge in Systems Biology is to provide a global and quantitative understanding of complex diseases by means of high-throughput technologies. In a system-level approach, the synergistic response dictated by the cooperation and interplay of all the components within an organism is considered as a fundamental concept in the interpretation of omics data. Recent efforts employ model-driven analysis and transcriptomic data for studying neurodegenerative diseases . However, while DNA microarrays have been extensively used to comprehensively characterize the differentially expressed genes (DEGs), the application of more sophisticated models, working beyond simple differential expression detection, is still an open To whom correspondence should be addressed. challenge . To this end, the ability of reverse engineering algorithms to infer putative genegene interactions, functional relationships and genome-scale regulatory networks has been already proven to be successful . Although the applications to multicellular organisms are still sporadic, this class of algorithms represents a promising approach toward genome-wide studies of complex diseases . Our aim in this article is to propose a novel reverse engineering strategy in order to investigate transcriptional changes induced by prion propagation in mouse models. Among the various neurodegenerative disorders, prion diseases have captured the attention of the scientific community due to their infectious nature and transmissibility . The cellular form of the prion protein (PrP C ) is the substrate for an autocatalytic reaction that, through its recruitment and modification, acts in the propagation of a disease-causing form denominated PrP Sc or prion. This autocatalytic process leads to the formation of fibrils and amyloid deposits, and is associated to a progressive fatal damage of the brain tissue. Importantly, experimental evidence has demonstrated that PrP knockout and PrP anchorless mice are resistant to infection. In spite of the many approaches aimed at unveiling its physiological functions, the degree of overlap between the pathogenic dysfunction of the protein in prion diseases and its normal role is still largely unknown [for a review see. In such a complicated puzzle, it is widely accepted that since PrP C is a key mediator for the neurotoxicity of PrP Sc , studying its biological functions through the identification of its related molecular partners may help unraveling the mechanisms underling prion-dependent neurodegeneration. In light of this observation, we integrate here a recently published transcriptional dataset , monitoring prion propagation in mouse brain tissues, with independent gene expression experiments performed under many diverse conditions. The computational framework introduced in this article aims at deciphering transcriptional variations in the context of a systemwide regulatory network, moving from a single gene perspective to a system-level analysis . The procedure is composed of three steps. In the first step, using a compendium of gene expression measurements, we obtain a genome-scale interaction graph of the mouse brain. Then, in a second step, we refine the initial model via a multiple regression scheme. In the third step, this linear regressive model is used to investigate expression changes associated to Prion infection, where for each gene we estimate the influence of prionand one downregulated (green/-node), while the remaining three do not show any changes (grey nodes). By knowing the corresponding genetic regulatory network (d), we can discriminate the coherent variations from the unexpected ones. As shown in the example, two of the genes that showed a significant expression variations are consistent with model predictions i.e. the expression changes of genes x and y can be explained by the variation of gene z. This is reflected by a skew distribution of discrepancies (i.e. residues), between model predictions and observed data, centered around 0 (f ). At the same time, one transcript, w, is not responding coherently to the initial model. The fact that its expression is unchanged, when it should have been increased, might relate to an anomalous direct effect of the pathology, preventing a synergistic response between all the genes in the system. Hence, the list of perturbed genes can be sensibly different from the standard DEGs identified from individual fold change analysis (b/e).propagation on its transcriptional regulation. In other words, we systematically identify the genes that result perturbed with respect to the nominal model by a prion infection. A remarkable outcome of our network-based strategy is the ability to identify PrP C among the predicted prion targets, in agreement with its role of primary substrate for prion replication. This result is even more important if we consider that to our knowledge prion infection has never been noted to interfere with the transcriptional regulation of the Prnp gene. Moreover, the comparison between the PrP C partners inferred on the nominal model and the PrP Sc targets predicted from the perturbed model allows to estimate the significance of the overlap between the two.In a recent work , more than 400 DNA chips were collected, monitoring the transcriptional changes associated to various disease stages, prion strains and mice backgrounds. The authors interpreted differentially regulated genes in light of the known network of proteinprotein interactions and hypothesized a specific temporal order of the biological processes involved. In our study, the same dataset ofis integrated with a large compendium (i.e. 1366 Affymetrix experiments) of gene expression measurements associated to various conditions. We first trained a gene network model (A c , see Section 2) on this large compendium. Next, on the background of this initial network, we evaluated the impact of an independent dataset containing gene expression variations caused by a perturbing event, that can be either an external agent (i.e. prion inoculation) or an endogenous perturbation (i.e. Prnp knockout). In our interaction network, inoculated prions were modeled as hidden variables/nodes, while a gene knockout was interpreted as a node deletion . We then investigated the behavior of the system upon Prion infection or Prnp deletion with special attention. Our outcome was different from previous studies [such as] because we allowed a gene to be significant regardless of its individual difference in expression between infected and normal samples. Rather, systemic gene expression alterations are here considered and used in order to estimate the expected expression changes of the singular transcript. In a systemlevel response, a global transcriptional rearrangement is expected to counter balance the new operating point/equilibrium. If this regulation is not taking place, or in other words if the gene is not able to properly respond, enhancing or repressing its transcription, its contribution in the disease progression should be taken into account as well . Therefore, our approach can be considered to be complementary to the analysis performed inare discussed. Subsequently, we consulted a drug database in search for druggable targets among the first neighbors identified in the extrapolated network for PrPs. Finally, an analysis performed across human, mouse and rat samples revealed co-expression patterns that were highly conserved across these species. 
