Data and text mining Automatic identification of mixed bacterial species fingerprints in a MALDI-TOF mass-spectrum Motivation: Matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry has been broadly adopted by routine clinical microbiology laboratories for bacterial species identification. An isolated colony of the targeted microorganism is the single prerequisite. Currently, MS-based microbial identification directly from clinical specimens can not be routinely performed, as it raises two main challenges: (i) the nature of the sample itself may increase the level of technical variability and bring heterogeneity with respect to the reference database and (ii) the possibility of encountering polymicrobial samples that will yield a mixed MS fingerprint. In this article, we introduce a new method to infer the composition of polymicrobial samples on the basis of a single mass spectrum. Our approach relies on a penalized non-negative linear regression framework making use of species-specific prototypes, which can be derived directly from the routine reference database of pure spectra. Results: A large spectral dataset obtained from in vitro mono-and bi-microbial samples allowed us to evaluate the performance of the method in a comprehensive way. Provided that the reference matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry fingerprints were sufficiently distinct for the individual species, the method automatically predicted which bacterial species were present in the sample. Only few samples (5.3) were misidentified, and bi-microbial samples were correctly identified in up to 61.2 of the cases. This method could be used in routine clinical microbiology practice. Availability and implementation: The complete dataset including both the reference database and the mock-up mixture spectra is available atMatrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry (MALDI-TOF MS) has been introduced as a genuine paradigm shifting technology in microbiology . Between 2005 and 2010, this has been facilitated by the release of commercial systems integrating instrument, reference bacterial spectral databases and user-friendly reporting software . Although MALDI-TOF MS identification still requires to isolate bacterial colonies on solid culture media, it provides clear advantages: (i) it requires a small amount of reagents reducing cost and waste per sample and (ii) 93 of the isolates are identified within 24 h after inoculation versus 10 for classical techniques . Identifying a species on the basis of a new MALDI-TOF MS spectrum is a complex multiclass prediction problem. Current commercial systems can identify several hundreds of bacterial species and a significant number of fungi . This depends on efficient algorithms that ensure reliable identification results. To address this classification task, first approaches relied on similarity-based ranking algorithms , but the application of machine learning algorithms such as support vector machines and random forests has more recently been reported as well . Every classification algorithm requires a reference (or training) database including multiple spectra from bacterial reference strains and species. The ongoing improvement of MALDI-TOF MS methods and databases should drive the introduction of innovative MS-based applications into clinical microbiology. This may include direct sample testing, microbial typing and antimicrobial susceptibility testing . MALDI-TOF MS for the detection of pathogens directly from clinical specimens is possible but only for a limited number of primary specimens and species. Improvement of such methods would constitute a major breakthrough in bacteriology. Currently, these approaches suffer from difficulties in sample preparation resulting in a low sensitivity and difficulties with polymicrobial samples. The available algorithms, tailored to identify bacteria from a pure colony, are not able to characterize a bacterial mixture . Only a limited number of methods have been proposed to overcome this limitation, and their performance has not been studied in detail . We propose a new method for automatic bacterial mixture characterization from a single spectrum using a reference database developed for routine bacterial identification and evaluate it using an original in vitro spectral dataset.Results obtained on the actual dataset analyzed at the hybrid level (as previously defined) are shown in. The most striking observation we made was a drop of 10 in the overall identification performance with respect to the simulation study (74.7 versus 84.6). We noted, moreover, that this gap was even more serious for mixed spectra (61.2 versus 81.8, hence a drop of 420), whose proportion was lesser in the actual dataset (62.2 versus 77.7). To better understand this issue, we resorted to a second simulation study meant to reproduce the actual mixture dataset. To do so, each mixture of the in vitro dataset was reproduced a hundred times. Two strains were considered each time, and the grid of relative concentrations considered to build the in vitro dataset was used, which therefore provided a simulated dataset of 18 000 spectra (see Supplementary Materials, Section S3). Results obtained on this dataset are shown in the panel B of. We noted that the identification performance could be expected to be lower, as a drop of almost 9 in the identification performance of mixed spectra was observed with respect to the previous simulation study (73.1 versus 81.8), although the grids of concentration ratios considered were slightly different. Nevertheless, a drop of 12 in terms of mixed spectra identification (61.2 versus 73.1) remained between the actual and this second simulated dataset. Results obtained for the various mixtures considered are shown in the middle column of. We noted that the performances obtained on the actual dataset were relatively consistent with those obtained by simulation for six of the eight mixtures analyzed as such. For the two remaining mixtures, however, strong discrepancies were observed. In the case of mixture G, we noted a much higher rate of erroneous identifications than expected. It turned out, however, that these errors were within-genus errors, involving prediction of the species JNH.FLH instead of, or together with the species JNH.ZIJ actually present in the sample. As described in the Supplementary Materials (Section S6), it seemed that the JNH.ZIJ strains involved in the mixtures were less specific to this species than were the majority of the strains of the reference dataset. Therefore, this suggested that the reference dataset did not capture the full extent of biological variability existing between strains of this species. We noted, moreover, fromthat the level of separability between these JNH species was only slightly higher above the threshold considered to define. Low discrimination between species fingerprints within a genus yields lower identification performance at the species level, but such cases are expected to be rare in routine settings. (A) Impact of the level of species separability within a genus on the decomposition performance. The x-axis shows the level of separability between the species of a given genus. This quantity reflects the extent to which species of a genus can be discriminated based on their MS fingerprints and was obtained by comparing each individual spectrum to the prototype of its reference species and to the prototypes of the species of the same genus. The y-axis shows the proportion of spectra involving a component of a given genus for which this component was misidentified at the species level but correctly identified at the genus level (i.e. the corresponding species was mistaken for another species of the same genus or predicted together with other species of the same genus). These two quantities were computed from the simulated dataset, as described in detail in the Supplementary Materials (Section S4). We noted that the proportion of erroneous decomposition greatly varied across genera and tended to decrease, whereas the separability between species of the genus increased. A minimum separability threshold of 1.4 seemed to be required to reasonably identify a mixture component at the species level. (B) Hybrid identification performance. This figure shows the performance obtained when the simulated dataset was analyzed at a hybrid level, where species for which the within-genus separability was 51.4, a threshold defined empirically from panel A, were analyzed at the genus level. (C) Impact of the hybrid strategy on the actual mixture database. Each mixture was represented according to the level of within-genus separability of its components (shown on the x-axis of panel A). The horizontal and vertical gray lines show the threshold of 1.4 used in this study to define a hybrid decomposition level, and the color code illustrates the level of resolution considered to analyze each mixture: mixtures A, D, H and J ended up being analyzed entirely at the genus level, mixtures B, C and E at the species level and mixtures F, G and I at a hybrid level, with one component defined at the species level and the other one at the genus level.illustrated the difficulty of analyzing mixture D at the species-level for instance. (D) Pairwise species separability in a large bacterial panel used for routine identification. The level of pairwise species separability was computed from the 20 species reference dataset involved in this study and from a larger dataset involving 742 bacterial species that was extracted from the database embedded in the VITEK-MS system (data not shown). The resulting distributions are shown as pairs boxplots gathering the values obtained for species belonging to the same genus (orange) or to distinct genera (green) the hybrid level. Therefore, this suggested that these two species might have been analyzed at the genus-level if the reference dataset captured more biological variability. Regarding mixture H, we noted a much higher rate of partial identification than expected. This mixture involved a component of each Gram type, and it turned out that the Gram-negative component was systematically detected, whereas the Grampositive component was often absent (see Supplementary Materials, Section S9). To explain this behavior, we postulated that the mixture preparation, which relied on optical density measurements, might have suffered from species-specific biases, leading to either an underestimation or an overestimation of their actual concentrations. To validate this hypothesis, the pure bacterial suspensions used to generate the mixed samples were numerated by flux cytometry and plate counting, as described in the Supplementary Materials (Section S7). It turned out that for the same level of optical density (0.5 McFarland), five to seven times more cells were present in the Gram-negative suspension than in the Gram-positive one. This could be explained by the fact that the McFarland standard is known to be accurate to estimate concentrations of Gramnegative bacteria such as Escherichia coli, and that the cells of the Gram-positive species were larger than those of the Gramnegative one (see Supplementary Materials, Section S7). As a consequence of this overestimation of the Gram-positive concentration, a mixed sample thought to be balanced (1:1) was actually a five/seven-to-one mixture in favor of the Gram-negative component. Therefore, this meant that a higher proportion of mixed spectra could be expected to lie below the mixture limit of detection, which led to a higher rate of partial identification. We noted also that while the performances obtained on the actual and simulated datasets were relatively consistent for same-genus mixtures (B and C), mixture B could be identified in more than half of the cases, whereas a much higher rate of partial identification was observed for mixture C. Interestingly, we noted fromthat the level of species separability within mixture B was much higher than within mixture C. Therefore, this highlighted once again that the level of species separability had a direct impact on the rate of partial identification, as discussed previously and in the Supplementary Materials (Section S5). Finally,(right) shows the identification performance obtained for mixed spectra depending on the relative concentrations of the species involved. We noted an overall discrepancy between the simulated and the actual performances, which could be explained in part by the poor results obtained for mixtures G and H, for the reasons described earlier in the text. We noted, however, that the gap increased when the mixtures were more unbalanced, which therefore suggested that the simulation model considered was optimistic for unbalanced mixtures. We emphasize, however, that the performances obtained on the real dataset were highly consistent with those obtained by simulation for balanced mixtures and that 478 of mixed spectra could be identified in this case.We have developed a fully automatic procedure to characterize a polymicrobial sample on the basis of a single mass spectrum that uses the same reference database as the one used to identify pure cultures in clinical routine. Therefore, this method could be used in routine clinical microbiology practice. When evaluated on a in vitro mock-up dataset, the procedure exhibited an encouraging performance when the reference bacterial fingerprints were distinct enough, which is the case for most of the species of clinical. Real dataset: mixture identification performance. Panels A and B, respectively, show the mixture identification performances obtained on the actual dataset and on the second simulated dataset, when they were analyzed at the hybrid level defined from. The left-hand figures show the mixture identification performances obtained globally and on mixed and pure spectra. The center and right figures, respectively, detail the identification performance obtained for mixed spectra within each mixture and according to the relative concentration on the major species. At the hybrid level, mixtures A and D were considered to be pure because they involved pairs of species of the same genera that were considered to be too similar interest. Few spectra were misidentified and mixtures were always at least partially identified. More than 60 of the mixtures were detected and correctly identified. The method was first evaluated by an extensive simulation study, which helped us in turn to optimally set its parameters. This simulation study revealed that the reference panel and the mock-up dataset considered in this study were relatively challenging. Interestingly, we noted also that the results obtained on the actual dataset were consistent with those obtained by simulation. Some discrepancies were observed for two mixtures, but they could be traced back: an insufficient biological coverage of the reference database in the first case and a bias in the sample preparation that lead to an overestimation of the concentration of a Gram-positive species. For these reasons, we believe that the performance truly attainable for this particular mixture panel lies between those obtained on the actual and simulated datasets and would be higher for a less challenging panel. In terms of perspective, a natural question raised by this study is that of mixtures involving more than two species. Although we could not evaluate our method on real spectra in this setting, a simulation study described in Suppplementary Materials (Section S7) suggested that the approach could work reasonably well for balanced mixtures involving two to five species fingerprints. The proportion of mixtures correctly or partially identified was $85 of more, and only a single component was missed in most cases of partial identification. We note also that an estimation of the relative concentrations c i of the bacterial species i 1,. .. , K predicted to be present in the sample can be empirically derived from the model parameters estimated by the Lasso, according for instance to b c i i = P K j1 j. This possibility was not investigated in this work, but the results obtained suggested that when a mixture was correctly identified, this estimation could be reasonably accurate in some cases (see Supplementary Materials, Section S9). Our future work will be to evaluate the relevance of this approach for blood culture or urine samples without preculture. This set up is likely to bring new challenges because the number of candidate bacterial species may be larger, and a stronger heterogeneity between the culture-based reference database and the spectra to analyze can be expected due to the matrix effects of blood or urine. Although these barriers have still to be overcome, the lessons learned in this study and the simulation framework proposed will be valuable assets toward this goal. Therefore, we think that our method provides an encouraging step toward future automated applications in clinical microbiology based on direct sample mass spectrometry. Conflict of Interest: The authors are employees of bioMerieuxbioMerieux, a company creating and developing infectious disease diagnostics, and in particular the VITEK-MS system involved in this study. No further potential conflicts of interest relevant to this article are reported. 
