Bambino: a variant detector and alignment viewer for next-generation sequencing data in the SAM/BAM format Bambino is a variant detector and graphical alignment viewer for next-generation sequencing data in the SAM/BAM format, which is capable of pooling data from multiple source files. The variant detector takes advantage of SAM-specific annotations, and produces detailed output suitable for genotyping and identification of somatic mutations. The assembly viewer can display reads in the context of either a user-provided or automatically generated reference sequence, retrieve genome annotation features from a UCSC genome annotation database, display histograms of non-reference allele frequencies, and predict protein-coding changes caused by SNPs. Availability: Bambino is written in platform-independent Java and available from https://cgwb.nci.nih.gov/goldenPath/bamview/ documentation/index.html, along with documentation and example data. Bambino may be launched online via Java Web Start or downloaded and run locally. Contact: edmonson@nih.gov.The SAM format along with BAM, its compressed equivalent, is an emerging standard for efficient storage and retrieval of second-generation sequencing data and their associated mapping results. Reference sequence alignment programs such as mapping and assembly with qualities (MAQ) and burrows-wheeler alignment tool (BWA) support SAM either directly or via conversion with samtools. Our program, Bambino, can detect SNPs, insertions and deletions directly from BAM files, leveraging a wide range of SAM sequence annotations during the process. This is an advantage over tools such as VarScan which are driven from intermediate files in the sparser pileup format. Because SAM provides an ideal interchange format, it is desirable to have visualization and analysis tools that not only support SAM, but also can work with collections of files. Bambinos variant detector and assembly viewer are capable of pooling and analyzing data from multiple BAM files simultaneously. Dynamic pooling of To whom correspondence should be addressed.BAM data facilitates integrated analysis of paired tumor/normal samples as well as data from multiple runs or platforms, and obviates the need for expensive construction of combined files for these analyses. This is an advantage over programs such as MagicViewer which can only work with a single file at a time.To assess the accuracy of Bambinos variant detector, we sequenced a set of 55 SNPs called from three liver cancer samples (, in submission), selecting candidates with a coverage depth of at least 10 reads and a predicted minor allele frequency of 30. Of these SNPs, 50 (90.9) were validated. For the subset of SNPs having a coverage depth of 20 reads or more, 30 (96.7) of 31 were validated. We also compared Bambinos predicted calls with two collections of validated variants from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) project, available from its data access portal (http://tcgadata.nci.nih.gov/tcga/). In a set of 1739 somatic variants identified in next-generation sequencing data of 440 ovarian cancer samples, Bambino was able to detect 1704 (97.9) of the same sites. Of the 35 variants which were not found, 20 showed no supporting reads in the associated BAM files, and 10 showed only a single supporting read, often of low quality. Because BAM files distributed by the TCGA project are subject to replacement by updated versions, it is possible we did not have the same versions used by the sequencing centers for their calls. If we eliminate these sites from consideration, our detection rate approaches 100. Additionally, we obtained a set of seven normal samples from the TCGA ovarian cancer project which have both whole-genome next-generation sequencing and Affymetrix SNP6 array data. Bambino identified 99 of heterozygous SNPs called from Affymetrix SNP6 array data in the equivalent whole-genome next-generation sequencing data. It is important to note that these TCGA dataset comparisons checked only for false negatives: because we did not perform any validation experiments in these data, it is difficult to estimate a false positive call rate. Validation rates generally will be heavily influenced by the settings used for variant detection and any subsequent filtering of putative sites. 
