Sequence analysis Bayesian analysis of gene essentiality based on sequencing of transposon insertion libraries Motivation: Next-generation sequencing affords an efficient analysis of transposon insertion libraries, which can be used to identify essential genes in bacteria. To analyse this high-resolution data, we present a formal Bayesian framework for estimating the posterior probability of essentiality for each gene, using the extreme-value distribution to characterize the statistical significance of the longest region lacking insertions within a gene. We describe a sampling procedure based on the MetropolisHastings algorithm to calculate posterior probabilities of essentiality while simultaneously integrating over unknown internal parameters. Results: Using a sequence dataset from a transposon library for Mycobacterium tuberculosis, we show that this Bayesian approach predicts essential genes that correspond well with genes shown to be essential in previous studies. Furthermore, we show that by using the extreme-value distribution to characterize genomic regions lacking transposon insertions, this method is capable of identifying essential domains within genes. This approach can be used for analysing trans-poson libraries in other organisms and augmenting essentiality predictions with statistical confidence scores.Transposon mutagenesis is a frequently used laboratory method for determining essential genes in bacterial organisms. Essential genes are those genes necessary for growth under a wide variety of environmental conditions. Knowledge of essential genes is important for the discovery of new antibacterial drugs because these genes are potential targets for inhibitors . One way of determining essential genes is to identify regions of the genome in which insertional mutations produce non-viable cells. To do this, a high-density library of transposon mutants is constructed. The synthetic transposons used in these studies are small fragments of DNA (typically 12 kb), which can be inserted into different locations in the chromosome through the action of a distally encoded transposase enzyme . For example, derivatives of the Himar1 transposon are widely used and have been characterized to insert at arbitrary TA dinucleotides without any other obvious sequence specificity bias . The total number of TA sites within a gene often varies $10100 sites depending on gene length and GC content. When a transposon inserts at one of these TA sites within a gene, it presumably disrupts the function of the gene. In a large library of transposon insertion mutants, genes harbouring insertions are presumed to be non-essential. Genes lacking insertions may be essential, as they cannot tolerate disruption; however, this depends on the size of gene and degree of saturation of the library . Typically, 1015 of open reading frames (ORFs) in a bacterial genome are found to be essential , including genes involved in core metabolism, cell-wall biosynthesis, protein translation and DNA replication (all of which are known targets of existing drugs). Differential analysis of essential genes in bacteria passaged through a host could be used to identify genes specifically required for infection . In the original implementation, the location of transposon insertions in individual mutants was read out via microarray hybridization. A primer-extension step, using a primer complimentary to one end of the transposon, was used to amplify the adjacent genomic region, and the relative abundance of these nucleic acid probes was quantified via hybridization to oligonucleotide representing each gene . Both the resolution and the quantitative accuracy of this method were limited. More recently, use of hybridization to analyse transposon libraries has been replaced by deep sequencing using next-generation sequencers, which yield millions of short reads (typically 50100 bp). Mapping of reads amplified from transposon boundaries can give precise coordinates of insertions within the genome . The high-resolution data afforded by deep sequencing present some unique challenges for analysis of gene essentiality. It has previously been observed that even essential genes can tolerate transposon insertions in the extreme N-and C-termini of the To whom correspondence should be addressed. The Author 2013. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com ORF . Previous analyses have often used an ad hoc criterion, such as exclusion of insertions in the first/last 520 of the coding region . For similar reasons, insertions are sometimes tolerated in linker regions between domains, or one domain but not another of an essential protein . For example, transposon insertions in the N-terminus of Mmpl5 caused attenuation of infection in mouse lungs, whereas insertions in the C-terminus did not . Thus, it is inaccurate to assume that only genes completely lacking transposon insertions are essential. In previous work, we described a novel statistical method for analysing transposon insertion data to characterize the essentiality of genes within an organism . The method was based on identifying the longest consecutive stretch of TA sites lacking insertions in a gene and estimating the likelihood of such an open region occurring by chance through the extremevalue (Gumbel) distribution. This model was based on an analogy to runs of tails in a sequence of coin tosses, where each TA site is viewed as an independent Bernoulli trial given the background insertion frequency in non-essential genes. This analysis was shown to correlate well with previous characterizations of genes essential for in vitro growth of Mycobacterium tuberculosis. The primary advantage of this method is that essentiality is based on statistically significant stretches of TA sites lacking insertions, regardless of the presence of insertions at other regions within the gene. This is in contrast to other models, such as a multinomial model, where the order of insertions is not taken into consideration , and it may miss regions characteristic of essential domains. One limitation of our previous method is that it depends on an a priori estimate of the insertion frequency in non-essential genes. Although this can be approximated (over all TA sites in the whole genome) or tuned iteratively (by separating out essential genes), a more rigorous statistical treatment is desirable. One possible way to approximate the parameters of this model and find estimates of essentiality is to use the expectation-maximization (EM) algorithm. Although the EM algorithm converges relatively quickly, it depends on maximizing the likelihood of the given distribution. This is not feasible for the product of Gumbel distributions, as no closed-form expression for the derivative exists. In this article, we present a formal Bayesian analysis of transposon insertion data that simultaneously estimates the likelihood of essentiality for each gene and the non-insertion frequency for each class, given in the data. We develop a formula for the joint and conditional densities based on the likelihood for each gene. We describe how to use a MetropolisHastings (MH) sampling procedure to estimate the parameters from the data, by sampling from the joint probability densities. This method produces a formal estimate of essentiality for each gene from the posterior probability given the observed insertion data, marginalizing over the unknown insertion frequencies in essential and non-essential genes.We applied our method to deep-sequencing data from transposon-insertion libraries of the H37Rv strain of M.tuberculosis. The full details of the construction of this library are presented in. Briefly, the libraries were prepared by transforming H37Rv using the MycoMarT7 phage, leading to $10 5 independent insertion events. Colony forming units were inoculated into 200 ml of minimal media and 0.1 glycerol and grown at 37 C. The libraries were sequenced with an Illumina GAII sequencer and a read length of 36 bp (68 million reads per library). The H37Rv genome has 4 411 654 bp, and it contains 3989 ORFs . This equates to an average of 15.9 TA sites per ORF, spaced $61 bp apart on average. Reads from two independent libraries were obtained, which were then summed together to achieve a higher sampling density of the TA sites. Of the 74 605 total TA sites in the genome, 38 984 (53.12) had reads mapping to them, showing evidence of a transposon insertion at those locations. Of these insertion sites, 32 701 of them occurred within ORFs. We assume that sites with a small number of reads (i.e. one) could represent spurious reads possibly because of sequencing errors; therefore, those sites were treated as lacking any insertions. However, Supplementaryshows the read counts fit an overdispersed Poisson distribution, suggesting most are legitimate insertions. Sites with just one insertion are discarded anyway to be safe, requiring insertions to be confirmed by at least two reads. This might lower the effective density of the dataset; however, this does not affect the method. Of the 3989 ORFs in H37Rv, 41 do not contain any TA sites. An additional set of 237 genes were deemed too short because of the fact that they do not contain enough TA sites (i.e n i 53), or the span of nucleotides was too short (i.e. s i 5150bp). Therefore, a total of 278 genes are reported as no-data because our analysis is not appropriate for these genes. The sampling procedure was run for 50 000 iterations, providing estimates of essentiality for all viable genes, as well as estimates of the parameter 0. To ensure that the algorithm mixed well and the samples obtained were uncorrelated, the first 1000 samples were treated as a burn-in period and discarded; only keeping every 20th sample after there. Supplementary Section S2 contains an analysis of the convergence of the MH procedure used. The value for 0 (non-insertion frequency in non-essential genes) was estimated to be 0:290 AE 0:004 (SD). Performance on a lower-density dataset, also H37Rv grown on glycerol, is described in Supplementary Section S3. This lower-density library contains fewer transposon insertions in coding regions, and it has longer runs of non-insertions among the genes ( 0 0:592). Rather than predicting more essential genes, our analysis is more conservative in its predictions, as it is less confident of the essentiality of the genes given the sparsity of the insertions. 
