Bayesian consensus clustering Motivation: In biomedical research a growing number of platforms and technologies are used to measure diverse but related information, and the task of clustering a set of objects based on multiple sources of data arises in several applications. Most current approaches to multi-source clustering either independently determine a separate clustering for each data source or determine a single joint clustering for all data sources. There is a need for more flexible approaches that simultaneously model the dependence and the heterogeneity of the data sources. Results: We propose an integrative statistical model that permits a separate clustering of the objects for each data source. These separate clusterings adhere loosely to an overall consensus clustering, and hence they are not independent. We describe a computationally scal-able Bayesian framework for simultaneous estimation of both the consensus clustering and the source-specific clusterings. We demonstrate that this flexible approach is more robust than joint clustering of all data sources, and is more powerful than clustering each data source independently. We present an application to subtype identification of breast cancer tumor samples using publicly available data from The Cancer Genome Atlas. Availability: R code with instructions and examples is available atSeveral fields of research now analyze multisource data (also called multimodal data), in which multiple heterogeneous datasets describe a common set of objects. Each dataset represents a distinct mode of measurement or domain. While the methodology described in this article is broadly applicable, our primary motivation is the integrated analysis of heterogeneous biomedical data. The diversity of platforms and technologies that are used to collect genomic data, in particular, is expanding rapidly. Often multiple types of genomic data, measuring various biological components, are collected for a common set of samples. For example, The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) is a large-scale collaborative effort to collect and catalog data from several genomic technologies. The integrative analysis of data from these disparate sources provides a more comprehensive understanding of cancer genetics and molecular biology. Separate analyses of each data source may lack power and will not capture intersource associations. At the other extreme, a joint analysis that ignores the heterogeneity of the data may not capture important features that are specific to each data source. Exploratory methods that simultaneously model shared features and features that are specific to each data source have recently been developed as flexible alternatives . The demand for such integrative methods motivates a dynamic area of statistics and bioinformatics. This article concerns integrative clustering. Clustering is a widely used exploratory tool to identify similar groups of objects (for example, clinically relevant disease subtypes). Hundreds of general algorithms to perform clustering have been proposed. However, our work is motivated by the need for an integrative clustering method that is computationally scalable and robust to the unique features of each data source. In Section 3.3, we apply our integrative clustering method to mRNA expression, DNA methylation, microRNA expression and proteomic data from TCGA for a common set of breast cancer tumor samples. These four data sources represent different but highly related and dependent biological components. Moreover, breast cancer tumors are recognized to have important distinctions that are present across several diverse genomic and molecular variables. A fully integrative clustering approach is necessary to effectively combine the discriminatory power of each data source.This work was motivated by the perceived need for a general, flexible and computationally scalable approach to clustering multisource biomedical data. We propose BCC, which models both an overall clustering and a clustering specific to each data source. We view BCC as a form of consensus clustering, with advantages over traditional methods in terms of modeling uncertainty and the ability to borrow information across sources. The BCC model assumes a simple and general dependence between data sources. When an overall clustering is not sought, or when such a clustering does not make sense as an assumption, a more general model of cluster dependence (such as MDI) may be more appropriate. Furthermore, a context-specific approach may be necessary when more is known about the underlying dependence of the data. For example, Nguyen and Gelfand (2011) exploit functional covariance models for timecourse data to determine overall and time-specific clusters. Our implementation of BCC assumes the data are normally distributed with cluster-specific mean and variance parameters. It is straightforward to extend this approach to more complex clustering models. In particular, models that assume clusters exist on a sparse feature set or allow for more general covariance structure are growing in popularity. While we focus on multisource biomedical data, the applications of BCC are potentially widespread. In addition to multisource data, BCC may be used to compare clusterings from different statistical models for a single homogeneous dataset.Note: Summary data includes 5-year survival probabilities using the KaplanMeier estimator, with 95 confidence interval; mean fraction of the genome altered (FGA) using threshold T 0:5, with 95 confidence interval; receptor status for estrogen (ER), progesteron (PR) and human epidermal growth factor 2 (HER2); and copy number status for amplification at sites 8p11 and 8q23 and deletion at sites 5q13 and 16q23. 
