Databases and ontologies Bayesian ontology querying for accurate and noise-tolerant semantic searches Motivation: Ontologies provide a structured representation of the concepts of a domain of knowledge as well as the relations between them. Attribute ontologies are used to describe the characteristics of the items of a domain, such as the functions of proteins or the signs and symptoms of disease, which opens the possibility of searching a database of items for the best match to a list of observed or desired attributes. However, naive search methods do not perform well on realistic data because of noise in the data, imprecision in typical queries and because individual items may not display all attributes of the category they belong to. Results:: We present a method for combining ontological analysis with Bayesian networks to deal with noise, imprecision and attribute frequencies and demonstrate an application of our method as a differential diagnostic support system for human genetics. Availability: We provide an implementation for the algorithm and the benchmark atOntologies are knowledge representations using controlled vocabularies that are designed to help knowledge sharing and computer reasoning . An ontology can be defined as a specification of a conceptualization , meaning that the ontology provides a computational representation of the concepts of a domain together with the semantic relations between them. Concepts are often represented as nodes and the relations between them as edges in a directed graph. Ontologies have become essential components of search engines for the world-wide web, e-commerce and medicine . They are used to represent items of a domain of knowledge, e.g. the ChEBI ontology not only provides a comprehensive representation of biologically relevant small molecules but also to represent the attributes of the items of a domain; for instance, the Gene Ontology (GO) provides a comprehensive representation of gene functions , i.e. the attributes of items of the domain of molecular biology. Terms that describe only attributes of items are the base of ontologies to which we refer as attribute ontologies. There is a special annotation relation by which items are linked to the terms in order to express the fact that an item possesses the attribute described by the term. The annotation propagation rule implies that the annotation relation is propagated along other relations to parent terms and thus to all ancestor terms . For instance, in GO, annotation propagation is defined over is a and part of relations. Hence, if a gene is annotated to the GO term ATP binding, it is implicitly annotated to all ancestors of the term including nucleotide binding. This leads to statistical dependencies between ontology terms that can substantially degrade the performance of ontology analysis methods . In addition, semantic similarity measures have been developed that exploit information content or graph structure to compare different items based on their annotations . On the basis of these measures, we have previously developed an algorithm for querying a database with ontology terms and ranking the results . However, none of the presently available ontology search algorithms has been explicitly designed to deal with the kinds of noise to be expected in real-life queries. For instance, in the setting of a clinical differential diagnosis decision support system, falsepositive queries may ensue if a patient has signs or symptoms unrelated to the underlying diagnosis. Consider phenylketonuria (PKU), which is a hereditary metabolic disease that is characterized by numerous phenotypic abnormalities in untreated patients. A person with PKU may additionally develop an unrelated disease such as rheumatoid arthritis (RA), but the physician may not recognize the fact that the joint manifestations of RA are unrelated to the manifestations caused by PKU. On the other hand, not every person with a given disease necessarily has all of the signs and symptoms that are associated with the disease. For instance, most patients with Marfan syndrome have aortic dilatation, i.e. an expansion of the ascending aorta, but only about half have ectopia lentis, which is a displacement of the lens of the eye. If a feature occurs more frequently in one disease than in another, then, all else equal, we would tend to believe that the former disease explains the presence of that feature better than the latter disease and therefore can be considered as the more likely candidate. Medical diagnostic decision support systems have been under development for decades, making use of algorithms based on Bayes theorem, fuzzy set theory, Bayesian networks and artificial neural networks. Many of these systems were designed for the diagnosis of individual diseases such as appendicitis. Several Bayesian network algorithms have modeled relations between diseases, findings and probabilistic links between the findings, but such Bayesian networks can be complex and intractable for large-scale problems . In this work, we develop the Bayesian Ontology Query Algorithm (BOQA), which, in contrast to previous approaches, integrates the knowledge stored in an ontology and the accompanying annotations into a Bayesian network in order to implement a search system in which users enter one or more terms of the ontology to get a list of the best matching domain items. For this purpose, we propose a graphical model that both reflects the hierarchical structure of the underlying attribute ontology and the propagation of errors of queries. We derive an efficient algorithm to apply probabilistic inference on this model given the queries and perform simulation studies to assess the performance. We conclude that embedding the ontology search into a Bayesian framework naturally enables a general framework for searching that deals with false-negative and false-positive query items, statistical dependencies in the attribute ontology and annotation frequencies. We demonstrate our method with an application as a decision support system for differential diagnosis in human genetics. The model is built using the Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO;), Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man (OMIM;) and Orphanet (Ayme,Ayme, 2003).shows an excerpt of the human ontology with annotated diseases, whereasshows a high-level overview for the problem. We note that a preliminary version of this application has been published in Robinson and Bauer (2011).In our clinical diagnostics application, the domain items correspond to diseases, and HPO terms describe the attributes (i.e. signs, symptoms or other phenotypic abnormalities, all referred to as symptom in the following) of the diseases. If I j 1, then the patient has disease j, and if I j 0, the patient does not have the disease. If H i 1, then feature i is present in the patient, whereas it is not present if H i 0. Q i 1 expresses that symptom i was identified as present in the patient, whereas if Q i 0, then symptom i was not observed by the physician making the diagnostic query. A false positive occurs if the physician diagnosed a symptom even though it is not truly present. A false negative occurs if the patient has a symptom, which is not observed by the physician.The result of this work is an efficient search procedure called BOQA that embeds an attribute ontology, items of a domain and their annotations into a Bayesian network.depicts a graphical representation of the network for an example ontology. The objective of the method is to find appropriate items given a set of user query terms, which we handle by applying probabilistic inference on the Bayesian network instance. Formulating the task as a Bayesian network problem allowsHere, I 2 is active, whereas I 1 is inactive. Given that, the probability that H 4 is on is f 2,4. The probability that H 7 is on is f 2,7. In addition, the frequencies between the diseases and all other terms are 0 so they can be omitted. Thus, there are four possible configurations of the model. The probability of configuration (A) is,7 , whereas for (D) it is 1 f 2,4 1 f 2,7 one to take false-positive and false-negative user queries as well as the attribute frequencies into account. Details are given in Section 2. We test BOQA by using it as a differential diagnostic tool for clinicians by simulating 11 840 patients with 2368 diseases annotated using information from the HPO, OMIM and Orphanet. ROC and precision/recall analysis were used to compare the performance of BOQA with two other ontology-based search procedures. We report the results for different settings for the false-positive rate , the false-negative rate as well the number of terms that are used to form a query of size s. The upper part ofshows the evaluation of simulations through ROC curves. The Res, Lin and JC approaches, which are all based on variants of raw semantic similarity scores, have the worst performance. The P-value method, ResP, shows better performance, as has been previously reported . The Bayesian approaches presented here shows the best performance at all tested noise levels. In particular, the BOQA performs better than the simpler BOQA approach, which lacks the inclusion of frequency information. BOQA is only beaten by the BOQA 0 approach, in which the true values of and are known. Due to the large disproportion between the positive and negative classes, the difference between the methods is noticeable but not very large in the ROC analysis. The difference becomes clearer, if one looks at the positive prediction value (PPV) at a fixed threshold. For instance, for the setting in which 0.002, 0.002 and s 6, from the data generated for the 11 840 patients, BOQA assigns 6933 items a marginal probability 40.5, of which 5626 were true positives. This gives a PPV of 80.In contrast, the P-value approach flagged 8636 items with a P-value 50.05, of which 3761 items were true positives, yielding a PPV of only 44. As reported in, the same conclusion holds for other parameter settings. The PPV and the precision of a classifier refer to the same quantity. In general, the so-called precision/recall analysis represents a complementary way of evaluating the results of prediction methods in which a range of recall, i.e. sensitivity, thresholds are analyzed. As shown in the lower part of, the Bayesian approaches indeed yield a higher precision over the entire range of recall thresholds with all noise configurations tested.We have demonstrated the use of BOQA as a decision support tool in human genetics, in which physicians enter the phenotypic abnormalities observed in a patient to search among 2368 Mendelian diseases for the most likely diagnosis to explain the symptoms of the patient. In this setting, BOQA models a generative process, in which a disease causes observable phenotypic abnormalities that are structured according to the HPO. After the physician has entered the observations, probabilistic inference is applied in order to rank each disease according to the probability that it explains the observed phenotypic abnormalities. We showed with simulations that a marginal probability of an item being 40.5 of items as calculated by our model is a more precise indicator for finding the true item as a P-value 50.05 . This holds true for the entire range of recalls . One obvious reason for this improvement is that BOQA directly models false-positive and false-negative observations and seamlessly integrates available frequency information. Another important reason is that BOQA is a global approach. It models the generation of search queries and applies probabilistic inference by which the result of each item depends on the result of all other items: the marginal probabilities add up to 1. In order to derive an efficient inference algorithm, we assume that exactly one item is responsible for the terms part of the query. This simplification is often realistic in the field of medical genetics, which we used as a demonstration. Clearly, BOQA can also find combinations of items that best explain a given set of query terms by defining appropriate prior distribution P(I) in Equation (6), which may be useful for certain applications. Note that this generalization has consequences on the tractabilityof the inference problem as combinations of items being active may have to be considered. Furthermore, for reasons of efficiency, we considered merely the frequency information for k-lowest probable features. In order to generalize the algorithm with respect to these simplifications, it may be worthwhile to apply more sophisticated probabilistic inference procedures such as sampling based or approximative ones. These may also help to reduce the still relative large gap between BOQA 0 and BOQA. Our Bayesian approach to ontology-based searching allows a wide range of extensions that may be useful in specific situations. For instance, if a physician is absolutely sure that a certain observed feature is present, then one could assign a very small-value (probability of false positives) to that feature. Analogously, a very small range value can be asserted for a particular feature, if the physician is sure that the feature is not present in the patient, say because it has been ruled out by a targeted laboratory investigation. On the other hand, if the physician is unsure, this could be encoded by larger values for these parameters. This additional knowledge could help to distinguish between different search results if no disease attains a probability 40.5. Another conceivable enhancement is the inclusion of knowledge about possible co-occurrences of features. As this requires a more complex annotation model, a simulation experiment similar to the proposed one could be used to verify the usefulness of the approach. Although we have presented an application of BOQA in the medical domain, the search algorithm is by no means limited to medicine. Applications for searching archives of documents in order to find documents belonging to categories that have been annotated to certain concepts based on word usage may profit from BOQA. For instance, if a word such as semiconductor occurs in 35 of 70 documents in the category computer hardware, then the frequency of this term would be 0.5; categories such as computer hardware would play the role of diseases in our example, and documents would play the role of patients. 
