BIOINFORMATICS DISCOVERY NOTE Systems biology Bioinformatics-driven discovery of rational combination for overcoming EGFR-mutant lung cancer resistance to EGFR therapy Motivation: Nonsmall-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is the leading cause of cancer death in the United States. Targeted tyrosine kinase inhibi-tors (TKIs) directed against the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) have been widely and successfully used in treating NSCLC patients with activating EGFR mutations. Unfortunately, the duration of response is short-lived, and all patients eventually relapse by acquiring resistance mechanisms. Result: We performed an integrative systems biology approach to determine essential kinases that drive EGFR-TKI resistance in cancer cell lines. We used a series of bioinformatics methods to analyze and integrate the functional genetics screen and RNA-seq data to identify a set of kinases that are critical in survival and proliferation in these TKI-resistant lines. By connecting the essential kinases to compounds using a novel kinase connectivity map (K-Map), we identified and validated bosutinib as an effective compound that could inhibit proliferation and induce apoptosis in TKI-resistant lines. A rational combination of bosutinib and gefitinib showed additive and synergistic effects in cancer cell lines resistant to EGFR TKI alone. Conclusions: We have demonstrated a bioinformatics-driven discovery roadmap for drug repurposing and development in overcoming resistance in EGFR-mutant NSCLC, which could be generalized to other cancer types in the era of personalized medicine. Availability and implementation: K-Map can be accessible at: http://Genomic medicine has dramatically increased our knowledge of the molecular changes that underpin disease states. Understanding alterations in gene expression can identify proteins and signaling pathways, which might serve as therapeutic targets. Moreover, recent technologic advances in nextgeneration sequencing facilitate the rapid assessment of gene expression changes in specific patients, allowing for individualized treatment. Although personalized genomics heralds the age of precision medicine, the comprehensive datasets obtained through sequencing require sophisticated bioinformatics tools to identify the critical genes that influence disease. Once these critical genes are identified, the next challenge is to predict what drugs would be useful in reversing the disease states. The connectivity map represents the first attempt to provide a computational framework to connect genes, drugs and diseases based on gene expression signatures . This method assumes gene expression changes could be used as a universal language to connect distinct biological states (e.g. diseases), allowing for the successful repurposing of compounds . In short, drugs known to be effective in one disease can serve as candidates for use in other diseases marked by similar gene expression changes. The power of this method has inspired other related work (with the goal of improving the utility of the connectivity map in drug repurposing and development. Nonsmall-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) serves as an ideal disease for a connectivity map-based approach. NSCLC accounts for $85 of lung cancers, and is the leading cause of cancer-related death in the United States and worldwide. Comprehensive characterization of cancer genomes have increased our understanding of cancer biology and moved NSCLC beyond standard clinico-pathologic classifications and staging to include molecular characterization based on newly identified oncogenic drivers, such as the mutant epidermal growth factor receptor gene (EGFR) . Although therapies directed against EGFR, such as gefitinib , have revolutionized NSCLC care, the duration of response is short-lived, and all patients eventually relapse through acquired resistance mechanisms To whom correspondence should be addressed. yThe authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the last two authors should be regarded as Joint Last Authors.. Identification of new targeted therapeutics is a priority, yet the ability to translate genomic datasets into new drugs has been limited. We devised an integrative systems biology approach using a functional screen combined with RNA-seq expression data to determine essential kinases other than EGFR that drive proliferation and survival in EGFR-mutant NSCLC. We performed an initial focused, functional genetic screen using short hairpin RNAs (shRNAs) that target the kinome ($600 kinases) in the H1650 lung cancer cell line. This line harbors an EGFR mutation, yet is intrinsically resistant to EGFR TKIs. We used Bioinformatics for Next-Generation Sequencing! (BiNGS!) , a novel bioinformatics pipeline to analyze and interpret functional genomic screening data by next-generation sequencing to identify essential kinases that drive the survival and proliferation signaling pathways of this EGFR-mutant line. Next, we determined the differentially expressed kinases in this cancer cell line by next-generation sequencing (RNA-seq). Integrative analysis was performed to identify kinases that were essential and dysregulated, and the list of essential and functional kinases was connected to explore therapeutic opportunities using the kinase connectivity map (K-Map) . The efficacy of the K-map prediction of kinase inhibitors was then validated in vitro .Essential kinases identified by the BiNGS! analysis. To determine essential kinases other than EGFR that drive the oncogenic signaling pathways in NSCLC, we performed a functional kinome genetic screen using H1650, an NSCLC line with an EGFRactivating mutation (deletion exon 19), yet for unknown reasons is relatively resistant to EGFR TKIs. From this kinome essentialscreen, we identified 14 candidate kinases (CALM3, CDK1, CDK6, DDR1, EGFR, EPHA4, GNE, IPMK, MARK3, PBK, PKN1, ROCK1, RPRD1A and TBK1) as essential for survival of this cell line (see Supplementaryand Supplementary Methods for details). Importantly, EGFR was identified from this functional genetic screen as essential in H1650. To determine whether these kinases were mutated in this cell line, we queried the comprehensive curated Catalogue Of Somatic Mutations In Cancer (COSMIC) database . According to the COSMIC database, besides EGFR, no other known somatic mutations have been reported in the 13 other essential kinases in H1650. Differentially expressed kinases identified by the RNA-seq analysis. To determine the differentially expressed kinase genes in H1650, we compared the expressed kinome of H1650 defined by targeted RNA-seq with four normal, human ATII cells, the putative cell of origin for lung adenocarcinomas, a histologic subtype of NSCLC . From the RNA-seq data, we focused on the 611 kinases that were the same kinases targeted in the functional genetic screens. We identified 193 kinases overexpressed and 131 underexpressed comparing the H1650 data with the normal ATII RNA-seq data (FDR 0.05, fold change 41.25). Again, EGFR was the top overexpressed gene in the list, supporting H1650s dependence on this oncogene. The heat map of this analysis is illustrated in Supplementaryand Supplementary Table S1. Integrating a functional kinome genetic screen and RNA-seq analysis. To refine the panel of identified key kinases driving the survival and proliferation of H1650 cells, we sought to integrate the candidate kinase genes identified from the essential kinome screen with differential kinase transcriptional profiling, two different yet complementary approaches. Transcriptional profiling analysis identifies kinases that are differentially expressed compared with normal lung ATII cells, yet provides no insight on kinase function. Conversely, the functional genetic screen allows discovery of kinases required for cell survival, yet provides no information specific to transformation. Therefore, integrating these two analyses will provide a list of functionally essential, potentially transformative kinases in H1650. By comparing the candidate gene lists obtained from the two approaches , seven kinases (CDK6, EGFR, MARK3, PBK, TBK1, DDR1 and EPHA4) were found to be common to both lists. Connecting the essential, potentially transformative kinases to therapeutics using the K-Map. We next asked what compounds could inhibit these essential and possibly transformative kinases and serve as a potential therapy to inhibit proliferation of this cell line. We queried the K-Map using the seven essential and potentially transformative kinases to connect them to drugs based on two different kinase activity assays (IC 50 and K d ). The top connection in both assays was staurosporine, a natural product isolated from the bacterium Streptomyces staurosporeus. Staurosporine is a potent, general ATP-binding site inhibitor across kinases, lacking any specificity . Interestingly, bosutinib, a Src and Abl dual inhibitor, was also positively connected and ranked 3 and 29 in the K d and IC 50 assays, respectively (and Supplementary). As expected, the two FDA-approved EGFR-specific TKIs for treating NSCLC patients, gefitinib and erlotinib, were not connected by the K-Map as effective therapy for the queried essential kinases . Experimental validation of the compounds identified by K-map analysis. To test whether compounds identified by the K-Map could provide better growth inhibition of H1650 cells compared with the current standard of care with EGFR-specific TKIs, we selected bosutinib as the candidate compound prediction of the K-map and validated its effect on cell survival. In comparison, we selected gefitinib, a drug approved for use in EGFRmutant NSCLC, which was not identified using our strategy and therefore, we predicted, would be less efficacious in H1650 cells . To further test our algorithm and K-Map, we identified sorafenib (connectivity scores of 0.234 and 0.226 in both kinase assays,) as a compound which was predicted to be ineffective against the H1650 cell line. To evaluate the sensitivity of bosutinib, gefitinib and sorafenib, H1650 NSCLC cells were exposed to increasing concentrations of these individual drugs and assessed for proliferation. As depicted in, bosutinib had the lowest IC 50 among the three tested compounds. Conversely, gefitinib and sorafenib had higher IC 50 values (IC 50 410 mM), indicating both drugs were less effective in inhibiting the growth of H1650 cells. As an additional negative control, we validated CI-1040, a compound that has a connectivity score of 0 (minimal effect and ranked 238 of 250 drugs) and was the least effective of the four drugs tested (IC 50 $34 mM) in H1650 (Supplementary). To estimate the statistical significance of the connection, we used the connection testing proposed by), where the two-tailed P-value associated with the observed connection score is the number of times the connection score obtained by a random gene signature with the same number ofgenes when queried to the database. Given a reference database and a query signature S with m kinases (here, m = 7), the K-Map connectivity score is KS S , and the two-tailed P-value is estimated as: p = Prob jKS r j ! jKS S j, where KS r is the connection score obtained from the random query signature with m kinases. For this particular study, we performed 500 permutations, and computed the P-value of the bosutinib connection as p = 0.052 (see Supplementary Methods for details). As demonstrated by the experimental validation, this indicates that the connection is not a false positive identified by the method. Generalizing the K-map prediction to acquired EGFR-TKI resistance. Acquired resistance to EGFR TKIs after therapy is universal in lung cancer patients limiting their usefulness as a treatment of NSCLC. Drugs that can overcome this resistance would dramatically impact lung cancer care. To explore whether bosutinib can be extrapolated as an effective therapy for an acquired mutation conferring resistance to EGFR TKIs, we tested H1975, a NSCLC line that harbors EGFR T790M, a gatekeeper mutation that is commonly acquired during treatment with EGFR TKIs and renders standard EGFR TKIs ineffective. As illustrated in, the IC 50 value of bosutinib on H1975 was $3.7 mM. As a negative control, we also determined the IC 50 value of gefitinib, sorafenib and CI-1040 for this cell line as $12, $17 and $31 mM, respectively (and Supplementary). Thus, bosutinib is effective in inhibiting the proliferation of a NSCLC line with an acquired EGFR resistance mutation. Rational combination of bosutinib and gefitinib shows synergistic effects in EGFR-mutant NSCLC cells. We further hypothesized that the addition of bosutinib to gefitinib would be synergistic in EGFR-mutant NSCLC cells resistant to single agent EGFR-TKI treatment. Indeed, the combination of bosutinib and gefitinib demonstrated additive or synergistic effects in both EGFR-mutant NSCLC lines (and D). Combination therapy was significantly improved in H1650 and H1975 (P50.05, Welch two sample t-test) in inhibiting cell proliferation when compared with individual drug alone (and D). Based on the additivism models, in H1650 combination therapy was synergistic (HSA = 0.34 and Bliss = 0.10), whereas in H1975 was additive (HSA = 0.19 and Bliss = 0.04) (see Supplementary Methods for details). Immunoblotting of H1650 and H1975 revealed an increase of cleaved caspase-3 (Casp3), an apoptotic marker, in the bosutinib and combination treated cells as compared with gefitinib alone and vehicle as early as 48 h after treatment (comments and suggestions from the three reviewers that have helped to improve the presentation of this manuscript. 
