Data and text mining Bioinformatics programs are 31-fold over-represented among the highest impact scientific papers of the past two decades Motivation: To analyze the relative proportion of bioinformatics papers and their non-bioinformatics counterparts in the top 20 most cited papers annually for the past two decades. Results: When defining bioinformatics papers as encompassing both those that provide software for data analysis or methods underlying data analysis software, we find that over the past two decades , more than a third (34) of the most cited papers in science were bioinformatics papers, which is approximately a 31-fold enrichment relative to the total number of bioinformatics papers published. More than half of the most cited papers during this span were bioinformatics papers. Yet, the average 5-year JIF of top 20 bioinformatics papers was 7.7, whereas the average JIF for top 20 non-bioinformatics papers was 25.8, significantly higher (P 4.5 10 29). The 20-year trend in the average JIF between the two groups suggests the gap does not appear to be significantly narrowing. For a sampling of the journals producing top papers, bioinformatics journals tended to have higher Gini coefficients, suggesting that development of novel bioinformatics resources may be somewhat hit or miss. That is, relative to other fields, bioinformatics produces some programs that are extremely widely adopted and cited, yet there are fewer of intermediate success.The 400 top papers, 20 per year for 20 years contained a total of 113 bioinformatics papers (28.25). When counting methods papers as bioinformatics-related papers, there were 136 (34). In more than half the years evaluated (55), a bioinformatics program was the most cited paper . This is striking because the relative fraction of bioinformatics papers within the literature as a whole is much smaller. To get an approximate estimate of how many bioinformatics papers are in MEDLINE, under the same definitions as used here to evaluate the Top 20 most cited, three MeSH-based queries were constructed varying in their stringency (see methods). As a baseline, 47/50 (94) of papers from journals with bioinformatics in their name were evaluated and determined to be reporting the development of novel software or methods (the others were analysis papers). The MeSH-based queries were launched and, as a positive control, the number of papers in journals containing bioinformatics in their name using the same query was evaluated. A sampling of 50 articles from each query was manually evaluated to estimate the number of false-positives (FP) returned (Supplementary). As shown in, the coverage of the least restrictive query (90) is close to the baseline estimate of the fraction of bioinformatics papers that contain software/methods development (94). Using this estimate, approximately 1.1 of the papers in MEDLINE report the development of bioinformatics methods or software. Thus, bioinformatics papers are approximately 26 to 31-fold over-represented among sciences most cited papers, depending on whether methods papers are counted as bioinformatics. A comparison of the journal impact factors (JIF) between the annually most highly cited bioinformatics papers and nonbioinformatics paper shows that despite their disproportionate impact on science, top 20 bioinformatics papers tend to be published in journals with a significantly lower average 5-year JIF (8.0) relative to the top non-bioinformatics paper (25.8, P 1.5 10 24 ).Similarly, bioinformatics and methods papers combined had an average JIF of 7.7 versus 25.8 (P 4.5 10 29 ).The higher Gini coefficients for bioinformatics journals suggest that development of novel bioinformatics resources may be somewhat hit or miss. That is, some approaches become widely adopted and produce a disproportionate number of extremely highly cited papers, while most are not widely adopted and, at least relative to some of the other journals analyzed here, there are not as many papers that fall between the two extremes. This may also provide a potential explanation for the JIF gap: Methods developed to solve biological problems, whether novel ones or significant improvements on prior methods, may be technically sound but if it is difficult to know a priori which ones will be widely adopted or sorely needed, then it would be understandable for that to diminish enthusiasm. There is a degree of subjectivity when classifying papers strictly into bioinformatics versus non-bioinformatics, as some cases are not clear (e.g. should a minor permutation of an existing method be counted as a new method?). But the magnitude of the differences found suggests that the main conclusions are not likely to be altered by a few differences of opinion regarding paper classification.This study highlights the disproportionate impact bioinformatics has had on science in the past two decades. The Gini coefficient analysis of citations by journal suggests a greater gap between citationrich and citation-poor bioinformatics papers, which suggests that it may be worth examining in greater depth why some of the less cited methods fared so poorlywere they simply not needed or was the right audience simply not aware of their existence? Are researchers reluctant to adopt new methods, even if better, if a solution already exists? It suggests bioinformatics, as a field is somewhat hit or miss or high-risk/high-reward, relative to other fields. As researchers, bioinformaticians face challenges in being recognized for their work that are somewhat unique to their field. Its tempting to suggest a change to the system is in order, but outside of bioinformatics there seems little incentive to do so. The use of altmetrics may be one immediate solution, but that presumes that others will officially recognize and accept their use. Another solution is for authors of superstar papers to invest in bioinformatics as a field by publishing substantial updates and improvements to their programs in bioinformatics-related journals. Awareness of the underestimated impact of bioinformatics is only part of the problem, the other part is finding effective solutions. 
