BioNetFit: a fitting tool compatible with BioNetGen, NFsim and distributed computing environments Rule-based models are analyzed with specialized simulators, such as those provided by the BioNetGen and NFsim open-source software packages. Here, we present BioNetFit, a general-purpose fitting tool that is compatible with BioNetGen and NFsim. BioNetFit is designed to take advantage of distributed computing resources. This feature facilitates fitting (i.e. optimization of parameter values for consistency with data) when simulations are computationally expensive. Availability and implementation: BioNetFit can be used on stand-alone Mac, Windows/Cygwin, and Linux platforms and on Linux-based clusters running SLURM, Torque/PBS, or SGE. The BioNetFit source code (Perl) is freely available (http://bionetfit.nau.edu).Biomolecular interactions can be represented by formalized rules . Collections of rules form rule-based models, which provide concise representations of biomolecular interaction networks and can be analyzed to obtain insights into how system-level behavior emerges from biomolecular interactions . Rule-based models must be analyzed with specialized algorithms and software tools , such as BioNetGen , which interprets models encoded in the BioNetGen language (BNGL) and provides deterministic, stochastic and hybrid forward simulation capabilities . To date, other critical methods of analysis, such as fitting (parameter estimation), have typically been applied ad hoc (e.g. by writing problem-specific programs), as in the study ofor, which leads to duplication of effort and hinders the ability to reproduce results. Although many algorithms and software implementations are available for analysis of models specified in traditional forms , such as that of ordinary differential equations (ODEs), standard techniques are not easily applied to rule-based models except for those rule-based models that can be recast into a traditional model form. Translating a set of rules into a reaction network (i.e. a list of reactions) or the corresponding ODEs for the mass-action kinetics of the network, a capability provided by BioNetGen, is expensive and sometimes impracticable. In such cases, direct simulation methods), which is compatible with BNGL-specified models, expand the range of biomolecular interaction networks that can be studied, because the cost of network-free simulation scales with the number of rules in a model, not the number of reactions implied by the rules . Software that provides a general-purpose fitting capability and that interfaces with a network-free simulator has not hitherto been available. Here, we present BioNetFit, a general-purpose fitting program for rule-based models that is compatible with BioNetGen and NFsim. Because of the potentially high cost of network-free simulation , BioNetFit has been designed to be used on clusters. It can also be used on stand-alone computers. BioNetFit implements a genetic algorithm . Below, we provide an overview of BioNetFit and a demonstration of its capabilities.To provide a demonstration of capabilities, we used BioNetFit together with BioNetGen, NFsim and experimental data ofto estimate parameter values for a published and an extended version of a model for activation of the epidermal growth factor (EGF) receptor (EGFR). Each version of the model accounts for EGF-induced oligomerization of EGFR. The published model is defined in Supplementary File S1, which is a .bngl file that directs BioNetGens ODE solver to produce simulation results. The file is derived from the .bngl file used by. This version of the model limits EGFR oligomers to a maximum size of four receptors per oligomer. This limitation was introduced byto avoid the need to use computationally expensive network-free simulation in fitting, which was performed using problem-specific code. The extended model is defined in Supplementary File S2, which is a .bngl file that directs NFsim to produce simulation results. The file is derived from the .bngl file used by. This version of the model imposes no constraints on the size of linear oligomers. It is otherwise identical to the published model of. The steady-state dose-response and time-series data used in each of the two fitting runs are provided in Supplementary Files S3 and S4, which are .exp files. Supplementary Files S5 and S6 are the BioNetFit configuration (.conf) files for the two fitting runs. These files complement Supplementary Files S1 and S2, respectively. In the fitting procedure, BioNetFit evaluated the consistency of simulation results with all available data (i.e. BioNetFit found a global fit). The chi-square metric was used to determine goodness of fit. Parameter estimates are summarized in Supplementary Table S1. The number of free parameters was nine, which included five physical parameters (e.g. rate constants) and four scaling factors (parameters of a measurement model), which define linear relationships between measured quantities and model-predicted quantities. The quality of the fit for the original and extended models is illustrated in. For best-fit parameter values, the extended model predicts that EGFR oligomers larger than tetramers do not form appreciably (Supplementary). This finding justifies the omission of these oligomers in the analysis of. BioNetFits ability to take advantage of simulation runs performed in parallel on a cluster enabled consideration of the extended model, which had to be simulated by calling NFsim. The KMC (stochastic simulation) method implemented in NFsim tends to be computationally expensive, because in such methods, system state is advanced one reaction event at a time . Use of NFsim was required because the extended model places no constraint on the size of (linear) EGFR oligomers, which form via polymerization-like reactions. Network-free simulation is typically required to cope with polymerization-reactions . As expected, we found that simulations performed by NFsim (for the extended model) were significantly more expensive than simulations performed by BioNetGens ODE solver (for the original model). The cost difference depends on various factors, including hardware, model parameter values and algorithmic parameter settings. For a representative CPU in the cluster we used and the parameter settings of Supplementary Files S1 and S2, an NFsim simulation is 5-fold more expensive than an ODE-based simulation. It should be noted that the cost difference depends sensitively on the value of one particular algorithmic parameter called f in Supplementary File S2, which scales system size. In general, the cost of a discrete-event stochastic simulation, the type of simulation performed by NFsim, depends on the number of reaction events per unit time, which in turn depends on system size (measured by the number of reactive molecules in the system). In Supplementary File S2, we set f 0.01, which corresponds to a system size of 1 of a cell. This setting reduces the cost of individual simulation runs (and memory requirements) at the expense of introducing noise (i.e. fluctuations arising from probabilistic reaction events). The noisiness of simulation results complicates the comparison of predicted and measured (population averaged) quantities. Because of this issue, in fitting, multiple NFsim simulations were performed for each BioNetFitgoodness-of-fit evaluation. BioNetFit allows a user to cope with the noisiness of stochastic simulation results in a brute-force manner by repeating simulation runs a user-specified number of times and then averaging the results. This procedure serves to smooth stochastic simulation results. Results from two additional non-trivial fitting demonstrations are summarized in Supplementary Tables S2 and S3, which provide bestfit parameter estimates, and Supplementary Figures S2 and S3, which illustrate the quality of fits obtained. The files needed to reproduce these results are provided in the example3 and example4 subdirectories of the examples directory in the BioNetFit distribution. The demonstrations each require NFsim. The example3 demonstration concerns a rule-based model for interaction of a trivalent ligand with a bivalent cell-surface receptor and parameter estimation on the basis of equilibrium data collected via flow cytometry . The example4 demonstration concerns a rule-based model for early events in T-cell receptor signaling and parameter estimation on the basis of temporal phosphoproteomic data collected via mass spectrometry-based proteomics . Notably, because changes in phosphorylation levels were measured relative to basal phosphorylation levels, this fitting problem required normalization of model outputs at the basal steady state, which is explained in the BioNetFit user manual. 
