Data and text mining A combinatorial approach to graphlet counting Motivation: Small-induced subgraphs called graphlets are emerging as a possible tool for exploration of global and local structure of networks and for analysis of roles of individual nodes. One of the obstacles to their wider use is the computational complexity of algorithms for their discovery and counting. Results: We propose a new combinatorial method for counting graph-lets and orbit signatures of network nodes. The algorithm builds a system of equations that connect counts of orbits from graphlets with up to five nodes, which allows to compute all orbit counts by enumerating just a single one. This reduces its practical time complexity in sparse graphs by an order of magnitude as compared with the existing pure enumeration-based algorithms. Availability and implementation: Source code is available freely atFollowing the advent of high-throughput methods more than a decade ago, analysis of complex network data has assumed the central role among computational methods in bioinformatics. The huge size of such networks on one hand and the computational intractability of the related methods on the other have spawned a number of innovative analytic approaches. Przuljdescribed an approach focused on small induced subgraphs called graphlets. Owing to combinatorial explosion, such analysis is usually limited to the 30 graphlets with 25 nodes . The number of appearances of graphlets in the network provides a description of the networks structural properties. On a local level, counting how many times a particular node participates in each kind of graphlet induced in the network gives a topological signature of the nodes neighbourhood represented as a 30-dimensional vector. For a finer description, the nodes of every graphlet are partitioned into a set of automorphism groups called orbits . Two nodes belong to the same orbit if they map to each other in some isomorphic projection of the graphlet onto itself. Nodes of graphlets on 25 points are grouped into 73 orbits shown by numbers and node colors in. For instance, the five nodes from G 14 belong to three different orbits, marked with different colors and numbers; the black (as well as the grey) nodes have symmetric positions in the graphlet and thus belong to the same orbit (31 for the black, 32 for the grey), and the white node belongs to the orbit 33. By counting the number of times a node of a graph appears in each orbit, the node can be described by a 73-dimensional vector of orbit counts, which reflects its position with respect to the local structure and gives insight into its role in the network. Existing methods for counting the graphlets and orbits are based on direct enumeration: to count them, they need to find all their embeddings in the network. We propose a new method, Orbit Counting Algorithm (Orca), which reduces the time complexity by an order of magnitude by computing the orbit counts using the relations between them and directly enumerating only smaller graphlets.Graphlets are used for different kinds of analyses in bioinformatics. Milenkovicnd PrzuljPrzulj (2008) designed a method for comparing node neighbourhoods based on graphlets and demonstrated that clusters of nodes in proteinprotein interaction (PPI) networks, obtained with their graphlet-based distance measure, share common protein properties. They showed how to use this approach to predict functions of proteins and their memberships in protein complexes, subcellular compartments and tissue expressions. Milenkovict al. (2010b) studied the relation between cancer genes and their network topology. They examined several clustering methods based on a graphlet similarity measure and found a difference between the PPI network structure around the cancer and non-cancer genes. Around 80 of the predicted cancer gene candidates have been validated in the literature. Similarly, cost functions for network alignment that are based on graphlet degree vectors show superior results in comparison with other state-of-the-art methods. In particular, MilenkovictMilenkovict al.showed how alignment between the PPI networks of Saccharomyces cerevisiae, Drosophila melanogaster and Caenorhabditis elegans with the human PPI network can be used for identification of genes related to aging, which are difficult to observe directly for humans due to our long lifespans. Milenkovict al. (2011) also applied graphlets to estimate nodes topological centrality. Their graphlet degree centrality measure is based on graphlet degree vectors and captures density and complexity of a nodes extended neighbourhood. They showed that the genes participating in key biological processes also reside in complex and dense parts of networks.argue that to understand the biological networks, we need to find the mathematical models describing their structure, even though this may not be of direct predictive use. Przuljshowed that although the network structure may be unstable in regions with low edge-density, high-density regions are suitable for network comparison using graphlet degree distributions. Graphlets can also assist in other analytic methods, such as global network alignment. GRAph ALigner (GRAAL) is an algorithm for aligning arbitrary networks based solely on their topology, which uses a local topology similarity measure based on graphlet degree vectors. The technique was used to show the large amount of shared network topology between yeast and human PPI networks, which can be used to predict biological functions of aligned proteins or reconstruct phylogenetic trees. H-GRAAL aligns networks by reducing the problem to a weighted bipartite matching that can be solved with Hungarian algorithm. Finally, MI-GRAAL integrates multiple sources of node similarity information, including the graphlet degree vectors.extended the use of graphlets by defining the orbits for graphlet edges and demonstrated their use with a new clustering method that is not limited to locally similar edges and allows some overlap between clusters. As a practical result, they predicted new pathogen-interacting proteins from clusters in the human PPI network that represent drug target candidates. Therefore, graphlet analysis is a useful tool for bioinformatics, and with the increase of available data there is also a growing need for fast graphlet counting tools.Graphlet-based network analysis is useful for various tasks in bioinformatics, such as alignment of PPI networks and prediction of protein functions based on topological similarities. Past studies used these approaches to, for instance, identify genes related to cancer and aging . We presented a new algorithm for counting graphlet orbits that is based on derived relations between orbit counts. To count the orbits for k-node graphlets, it enumerates k 1node graphlets and a single k-node graphlet. Empirical results confirm that this decreases the time complexity by an order of magnitude in comparison with other known methods. In practical terms, the algorithm counts orbits in large PPI networks 50100 times faster than other state-of-the-art algorithms.. Comparison of times needed for counting orbits in four-node graphlets in random networks. Graphs are cut off at one minute; results of experiments in which the methods were allowed to run for up to 1 h are available in the Supplementary Material 
