Gene expression A combined omics study on activated macrophages—enhanced role of STATs in apoptosis, immunity and lipid metabolism Background: Macrophage activation by lipopolysaccharide and ad-enosine triphosphate (ATP) has been studied extensively because this model system mimics the physiological context of bacterial infection and subsequent inflammatory responses. Previous studies on macro-phages elucidated the biological roles of caspase-1 in post-transla-tional activation of interleukin-1b and interleukin-18 in inflammation and apoptosis. However, the results from these studies focused only on a small number of factors. To better understand the host response, we have performed a high-throughput study of Kdo2-lipid A (KLA)-primed macrophages stimulated with ATP. Results: The study suggests that treating mouse bone marrow-derived macrophages with KLA and ATP produces synergistic effects that are not seen with treatment of KLA or ATP alone. The syn-ergistic regulation of genes related to immunity, apoptosis and lipid metabolism is observed in a time-dependent manner. The synergistic effects are produced by nuclear factor kappa-light-chain-enhancer of activated B cells (NF-kB) and activator protein (AP)-1 through regulation of their target cytokines. The synergistically regulated cytokines then activate signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT) factors that result in enhanced immunity, apoptosis and lipid metabolism ; STAT1 enhances immunity by promoting anti-microbial factors; and STAT3 contributes to downregulation of cell cycle and upregula-tion of apoptosis. STAT1 and STAT3 also regulate glycerolipid and eicosanoid metabolism, respectively. Further, western blot analysis for STAT1 and STAT3 showed that the changes in transcriptomic levels were consistent with their proteomic levels. In summary, this study shows the synergistic interaction between the toll-like receptor and purinergic receptor signaling during macrophage activation on bacterial infection. Availability: Time-course data of transcriptomics and lipidomics can be queried or downloaded from http://www.lipidmaps.org.Lipopolysaccharide (LPS) is an endotoxin from bacterial cell wall that stimulates leukocytes via a toll-like receptor (TLR)-4 pathway . Kdo2-lipid A (KLA) is an active component of LPS with an analogous response in activating macrophages. The TLR-4 signaling pathway ultimately mediates the release of pro-and anti-inflammatory factors by activating mitogen-activated protein kinase cascade, nuclear factor kappa-light-chain-enhancer of activated B cells (NF-kB) and/or activator protein (AP)-1 . In this study, we have primed macrophages with KLA before stimulation with ATP. KLA priming represents bacterial exposure, which elicits subsequent release of ATP in the extracellular space from inflamed, damaged or dying cells. ATP then acts via autocrine and paracrine signaling and is interpreted as a danger signal by immune cells. These events induce the transcription of pro-inflammatory mediators through the transcription factors (TFs) NF-kB and AP1 . Interestingly, a model system of ATP stimulation of LPS-primed macrophages exhibited increased cell death compared with the macrophages treated with either ATP or LPS alone . The increased apoptosis, caused by LPS and ATP treatment, was reduced with caspase-1 inhibitors but not with mitogen-activated protein kinase, protein kinase (PK)-C, or PK-A inhibitors . In addition to LPS and ATP treatment, there have been a number of studies on LPS-primed macrophages stimulated by various ligands including air particles, lysophosphatidic acid, interferon (IFN)-, IL-4 and toxicants (El). Moreover, sequential activation of one or more TLR receptors by their respective ligands was studied in LPSprimed macrophages . Most of these studies showed the importance of selected genes or cytokines in LPS-primed macrophages to mimic the biological context of bacterial infection and subsequent immune response. In addition to the cytokine response, LPS-stimulated macrophages showed changes in lipids such as eicosanoids, sphingolipids, sterols, glycerolipids and glycerophospholipids (; Knapp and English, To whom correspondence should be addressed.We used paired t-test between experiments and control (Case I analysis) and unpaired t-test between the three treatments (Case II analysis) to identify differentially regulated genes (see Section 2). The results from the paired t-test in the Case I analysis showed few significantly regulated genes in the A group at 15 min (0.25 h), with the number increasing from 15 min to 4 h and then decreasing (and b). In the case of K and KA groups, 4 h priming with K before the first measurement affected many genes, so that the number of significantly regulated genes at 15 min was $3000. In the K group, the number of significantly regulated genes peaked at 30 min (equivalent to 4 h 30 min after treatment with K) and decreased substantially after 30 min. In contrast, the KA group showed the number of regulated genes to remain high for most of the time points. To identify the similarities and the differences across the different treatments, Venn diagrams were drawn for all the time points (and Supplementary). The results suggested that there is a significant number of regulated genes unique to the KA treatment (zone c in the Venn diagram), not regulated in either the K or the A treatment alone. However, Case I analysis has two problems. The first problem relates to false KA-unique genes that showed up as differentially regulated genes in the KA treatment because of slight differences in P-values near the threshold. For example, a gene with a P-value just below the threshold in the KA treatment, but just above it in the K or A treatment, would, erroneously, be identified as unique to the KA treatment. The second problem relates to missed KAunique genes, genes differentially regulated in all three treatment groups, but significantly more regulated in the KA group than in the K or the A group as a result of synergistic effect. To circumvent these problems, the Case II analysis of the unpaired t-test between the treatment groups was adopted. In the Case II analysis, two independent unpaired t-tests were performed: between KA and K groups, and between KA and A groups. The results from the first t-test produced the list of the genes that are differently regulated in the KA group compared with the K group. These genes were either affected by A or synergistically affected by KA (, circle A). Similarly, the genes from the second t-test were either affected by K or synergistically affected by KA (, circle K). The intersection between the two t-test results, then, produced the list of genes that are differently regulated in the KA group compared with both the K and the A groups (, intersection aik). Uniquely regulated genes in the KA group were categorized into synergistic and antagonistic subsets based on the direction and the magnitude of the regulation in the two comparisons. Synergistic regulation is used here in a less restricted manner to include genes significantly regulated by KA as compared with K and A alone. This view includes but goes beyond the traditional definition of synergism ; this approach was taken to identify all the genes regulated by both K and A. A gene was considered to be synergistically regulated if its regulation in the KA group versus both the K and the A group was significantly higher or lower. For example, a gene that shows a 10-fold change in the KA group but only 5-fold changes in both the K and the A group was considered to be synergistically upregulated. Other possible cases of the synergistic effect are defined in Supplementary. On the other hand, a gene was considered to be antagonistic if its regulation in the KA group was upregulated with respect to the K group but downregulated with respect to the A group, or vice versa. Pathway enrichment for the Case II synergistic genes was done for all the time points to find the pathways that are synergistically affected by the KA treatment.shows the histogram of the number of regulated genes for all the time points in selected top enriched pathways. TFs from the Case II synergistic set of genes were also mapped to the subset of their target genes, which showed synergistic regulation at the same or future time points . For Case I, TF-target genes mapping, see Supplementary. The results of Case II analyses are presented here. 
