Database and ontologies Brain: biomedical knowledge manipulation Brain is a Java software library facilitating the manipulation and creation of ontologies and knowledge bases represented with the Web Ontology Language (OWL). Availability and implementation: The Java source code and the library are freely available at https://github.com/loopasam/Brain and on the Maven Central repository (GroupId: uk.ac.ebi.brain). The documentation is available at https://github.com/loopasam/Brain/wiki.Knowledge bases, a concept from computer science (KrotzschKrotzsch et al., 2012 for an introduction), could be a solution to improve the interoperability and the value of the large amount of biomedical information available online. At the time of writing, a few options are available to handle such knowledge bases: complex libraries as the Web Ontology Language (OWL)-API or didactic graphical user interfaces, such as Protege (http://protege.stanford.edu/) or TopBraid Composer (http://www.topbraidcomposer.com). An intermediary framework, OWLTools (http://code.google.com/p/owltools/), provides some methods to query biomedical ontologies, but the interaction with the library is mostly done via command-lines, which limits the scale of projects that can be built with it. Brainthe Java software library presented in this manuscript addresses these issues and provides a comprehensive and simplified interface, dedicated to the programmatic creation and query of biomedical knowledge bases. The library aims at bridging the gap between graphical user interfaces and the OWL-API and is particularly useful to develop web applications. Brain has a particular focus on the EL profile of OWL, as it covers the majority of biomedical use-cases and unlocks good reasoning performance and scalability.Brain is an open source Java library designed to build and query biomedical knowledge bases or OWL ontologies. The library is centered on the EL profile and designed to be suitable and scalable for biomedical knowledge representation. The convenience methods provided by Brain should simplify the development of biomedical knowledge bases and allow developers to increase their productivity while effectively dealing with data integration challenges. 
