BreakFusion: targeted assembly-based identification of gene fusions in whole transcriptome paired-end sequencing data Despite recent progress, computational tools that identify gene fusions from next-generation whole transcriptome sequencing data are often limited in accuracy and scalability. Here, we present a software package, BreakFusion that combines the strength of reference alignment followed by read-pair analysis and de novo assembly to achieve a good balance in sensitivity, specificity and computational efficiency. Availability: http://bioinformatics.mdanderson.org/main/BreakFusionDespite recent progress, bioinformatics tools that analyze RNA-seq data are often limited in accuracy and scalability. Alignment-based tools typically predict such large numbers of candidates that further examination of the data is impractical. Furthermore, many findings are artifacts derived from a large number of erroneous short reads produced by the next-generation sequencing (NGS) instruments or are read misalignments produced by the sequence aligners. Assembly-based approaches (Martin and) can potentially achieve higher accuracy because they leverage dependency among reads and are less sensitive to errors in individual reads. With sufficient coverage, longer and higher quality sequences can be assembled from short reads, resulting in improved specificity. However, existing assembly-based approaches potentially lack sensitivity to rare events such as gene fusions because they are designed to reconstruct entire transcriptomes, rather than focus on novel sequences. We reason that a targeted transcriptome assembly strategy that focuses on assembling novel junction sequences can potentially achieve a better balance in sensitivity, specificity and computational efficiency. To whom correspondence should be addressed.To test BreakFusions performance, we compared it with TopHatFusion and defuse using four publicly available RNA-seq datasets: a prostate cancer cell line (NCIH660) and a matched lymphoblastoid cell line (GM12878) , a breast cancer cell line (MCF-7) and a chronic myelogenous leukemia cell line (K-562) . BreakFusion achieved better sensitivity and specificity tradeoff in these tests (Supplementary Data). It also used substantially less CPU time. We further applied BreakFusion to analyze RNA-seq data for 155 acute myeloid leukemia (AML) samples as part of The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) project. This dataset was also analyzed by the Genome Sciences Centre at the BC Cancer Agency (BCCA) using Tran-Abyss , which resulted in 67 instances of experimentally validated fusions. BreakFusion was able to rediscover all these fusions and additionally predicted eight new instances of fusions, which were subsequently confirmed by the BCCA group (Supplementary Data).To the best of our knowledge, BreakFusion is the first approach that performs targeted assembly on RNA-seq data for fusion identification. The results of our experiments indicate that BreakFusion has achieved sensitivity and specificity comparable or better than other tools, and is clearly more computationally efficient. This, in our view, represents a methodology improvement that will benefit many projects that utilize NGS RNA sequencing data. Besides fusion discovery, in principle, BreakFusion can be applied to identify novel alternative splicing events. The component programs of BreakFusion are efficiently implemented in C++ and perl. It finished analyzing 155 TCGA AML BAM files in 2 h using 155 CPUs with 4 GB RAM each. BreakFusion is freely available for academic use at http:// bioinformatics.mdanderson.org/main/BreakFusion. 
