Sequence analysis CD-HIT: accelerated for clustering the next-generation sequencing data CD-HIT is a widely used program for clustering biological sequences to reduce sequence redundancy and improve the performance of other sequence analyses. In response to the rapid increase in the amount of sequencing data produced by the next-generation sequencing technologies, we have developed a new CD-HIT program accelerated with a novel parallelization strategy and some other techniques to allow efficient clustering of such datasets. Our tests demonstrated very good speedup derived from the parallelization for up to $24 cores and a quasi-linear speedup for up to $8 cores. The enhanced CD-HIT is capable of handling very large datasets in much shorter time than previous versions. Availability: http://cd-hit.org.Sequence analysis has played a crucial role in computational biology. With the advancement of the next-generation sequencing technologies, the amount of available sequencing data is growing exponentially. Removing redundancy from such data by clustering could be crucial for reducing storage space, computational time and noise interference in some analysis methods, etc. CD-HIT was originally developed to cluster protein sequences to create reference databases with reduced redundancy and was then extended to support clustering nucleotide sequences . Since its release, CD-HIT has become very widely used for a large variety of applications ranging from non-redundant dataset creation , protein family classifications , artifact identification , metagenomics annotation , RNA analysis , to various prediction studies . With sequencing data rapidly growing in public data repositories as well as in individual laboratories, there has been strong demand for an enhanced CD-HIT with greater efficiency. In response to such demand, we have developed this enhanced and parallelized version of CD-HIT, to exploit the fact that multi-core machines have become very common in ordinary laboratories. A computer cluster-based parallelization procedure for CD-HIT has been proposed in, though not fully parallelized, this procedure provides good speedup using computer cluster. Since computer clusters are not as easily available as multi-core machines, here we propose an alternative parallelization technique, which assumes shared memory model and works well on multi-core machines.To see how much performance improvement has been achieved, we tested the new CD-HIT (V4.6) and the old CD-HIT (V3.1.2) on a set of datasets including two protein sequence datasets: SWISS-PROT ($0.4 M sequences), NR ($12 M sequences) and two DNA sequence datasets: HumanGut (MH0002, $23 M reads;) and TwinStudy (SRP000319, $8 M reads;). Both the SWISS-PROT and the NR datasets were downloaded from NCBI (ftp://ftp. ncbi.nih.gov/blast/db/FASTA/) on October 20, 2010. We also compared CD-HIT with a similar program UCLUST (V5.1.221) from Edgar (2010). These tests were done on a Debian Linux server with four 12-core AMD Opteron 6172 processors. Equivalent parameters were used for different programs whenever possible. Details and additional tests are available in Supplementary Material 2.compares the efficiency of the enhanced CD-HIT to the previous version of CD-HIT and the latest UCLUST. The results demonstrate that the new CD-HIT without using multi-core is significantly more efficient than the old one and is comparable to or more efficient than UCLUST as well. When multi-cores are used, the new CD-HIT is much more efficient than either of them. To test the effectiveness of the parallelization in the new CD-HIT, the full datasets were clustered using different number of cores. The time speedups are shown in, which indicates the parallelization has good speedup for up to $24 cores with a quasi-linear speedup for up to $8 cores. Besides speed improvements, the new CD-HIT also has better clustering quality than the old CD-HIT and UCLUST (Supplementary Material and). 
