CellTracker (not only) for dummies Motivation: Time-lapse experiments play a key role in studying the dynamic behavior of cells. Single-cell tracking is one of the fundamental tools for such analyses. The vast majority of the recently introduced cell tracking methods are limited to fluorescently labeled cells. An equally important limitation is that most software cannot be effectively used by biologists without reasonable expertise in image processing. Here we present CellTracker, a user-friendly open-source software tool for tracking cells imaged with various imaging modalities, including fluorescent, phase contrast and differential interference contrast (DIC) techniques. Availability and implementation: CellTracker is written in MATLAB (The MathWorks, Inc., USA). It works with Windows, Macintosh and UNIX-based systems. Source code and graphical user interface (GUI) are freely available at: http://celltracker.website/.The migration analysis of in vitro cultured cell populations plays a key role in a wide range of dynamic cell behavior studies . In the last decade, dozens of methods have been proposed for such analyses . There is no universally best, but a great variety of methods exist for different fluorescent microscopic scenarios . However, very few tracking tools can analyze images taken by phase contrast, DIC, or other label-free microscopy (i.e. techniques using transmitted light or its modulations), which are common ways to observe living cells. Furthermore, the majority of these tools require relevant image processing skills, which strongly limits their practical usefulness within the biologist community . For instance, BioImageXD , TimeLapseAnalyzer and TACTICS require segmented cells for tracking, and cell segmentation on label-free microscopic images is very challenging. Accordingly, so-called point-and-click manual tracking tools are often used and they are considered as the gold standard for cell tracking . Nevertheless, manual tracking is operator-dependent, laborious and error-prone . An automated, user-friendly, and versatile open source software with track editing possibilities would boost live cell analysis research. In this work we present CellTracker, a cellcenter detection and tracking tool for different imaging modalities. An early version of CellTracker was already used in . Here we describe its implementation and usage (Supplementary Material S1) with the intention of providing a tool also for users with limited image processing background.A qualitative comparison of CellTracker with relevant tracking tools is shown in Supplementary Material S3. Furthermore, we quantitatively compared six different settings of CellTracker (details in Supplementary Material S4) by using three different datasets (fluorescence, DIC and phase contrast images, Supplementary Material S5). We only tracked cells that are present in the first frame, and excluded those touching image borders (ground truth is provided in Supplementary Material 6).summarizes the obtained results (Supplementary Material S7). We used three metrics for this comparison (Supplementary Material S8). Relative root mean squared error, normalized to the cell size (rRMSE), Jaccard similarity coefficient (JSC,) and overall processing time. Automatic tracking was considerably precise (average rRMSE 0.28), but it required the most time for post-processing of the detected tracks. Automatic tracking might be the best choice for applications where the detection of cells is relatively easy. Semiautomatic tracking was the fastest modality and represents a good trade-off between cell detection and tracking accuracy. As expected the most accurate solution was manual tracking. The best solution was obtained by manual tracking combined with template matching (rRMSE 0.22, JSC 0.99). In conclusion, CellTracker is a versatile tool able to track cells and other objects (Supplementary Material S9) in different scenarios. Combining accuracy and usability, it is an easy-to-use and efficient solution especially for users with limited expertise in image processing. 
