CGHnormaliter: a Bioconductor package for normalization of array CGH data with many CNAs CGHnormaliter is a package for normalization of array comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH) data. It uses an iterative procedure that effectively eliminates the influence of imbalanced copy numbers. This leads to a more reliable assessment of copy number alterations (CNAs). CGHnormaliter is integrated in the Bioconductor environment allowing a smooth link to visualization tools and further data analysis.Array comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH) is a popular experimental technique for detection of copy number alterations (CNAs) at high resolution. Its principal application areas are cancer research and clinical genetics. Recently, in Britain the first baby was born with the help of aCGH to screen eggs for a normal number of chromosomes, after the mother had undergone 13 failed attempts at IVF and three miscarriages (BBC News, 2009, http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/health/8232146.stm). Since resolutions of (oligonucleotide) aCGH chips increase constantly and already reach up to 1 M probes, experiments yield massive amounts of data. Normalization is an important first step in the analysis of these data and aims at minimizing the effect of the experimental bias (e.g. dye bias) in the measurements. Usually standard methods originating from the gene expression data area, such as global-median and LOWESS normalization, are employed for this purpose. However, ashave convincingly shown, application of these standard techniques to aCGH data with many CNAs lead to an improper centralization and hence to inaccurate downstream analyses. In the recent past, a few aCGH normalization methods for twodye aCGH data have been designed that deal with this issue. Their common approach is filtering of CNAs from the data to calculate a more appropriate median value or LOWESS regression curve for the whole dataset. As a result, after normalization, the log 2 intensity ratios of the non-CNAs (normals) will generally be closer to zero and hence better reflect the biological reality. S-LowessWe have developed a Bioconductor package CGHnormaliter to accurately normalize aCGH data. The algorithm effectively eliminates the overnormalizing effect of CNAs as well as largescale copy number variations (LCVs) by temporarily excluding them. Additionally, results are enhanced by iterative refinement and by employing a state-of-the-art calling method to identify these CNAs. The calling results are provided to the user as a bonus. CGHnormaliter can easily be combined with other Bioconductor or R packages to form a workflow. Moreover, the standard format of the results allows for straightforward downstream analysis of the normalized data. 
