cgmisc: enhanced genome-wide association analyses and visualization High-throughput genotyping and sequencing technologies facilitate studies of complex genetic traits and provide new research opportunities. The increasing popularity of genome-wide association studies (GWAS) leads to the discovery of new associated loci and a better understanding of the genetic architecture underlying not only diseases, but also other monogenic and complex phenotypes. Several softwares are available for performing GWAS analyses, R environment being one of them. Results: We present cgmisc, an R package that enables enhanced data analysis and visualization of results from GWAS. The package contains several utilities and modules that complement and enhance the functionality of the existing software. It also provides several tools for advanced visu-alization of genomic data and utilizes the power of the R language to aid in preparation of publication-quality figures. Some of the package functions are specific for the domestic dog (Canis familiaris) data. Availability and implementation: The package is operating system-independent and is available from: https://High-throughput genotyping and sequencing has opened several new research opportunities to study complex genetic traits and genome-wide association studies (GWAS) is a popular way to analyse genotyping data from segregating populations. Widely used GWAS softwares include PLINK , EMMAX , GCTA and GenABEL . A single software package is rarely sufficiently complete to cover all aspects of a typical genome-wide analysis pipeline. Transferring data between different softwares is often a laborious process. One advantage of the GenABEL package, that often makes it the software of choice, is that in addition to GWAS-specific functionalities, it provides access to the R (R Development Core) language and community-contributed packages. Here we developed a number of algorithms and solutions to several common GWAS tasks. Some of these solutions aim at facilitating production of publication-quality data/results visualization (see, e.g.). Several cgmisc functions have been used to produce results and visualizations for peer-reviewed publications, e.g.. Here, we present these and more functions in the form of the documented and supported R package cgmisc. 
