Systems biology A computational model to predict the immune system activation by citrus-derived vaccine adjuvants Motivation: Vaccines represent the most effective and cost-efficient weapons against a wide range of diseases. Nowadays new generation vaccines based on subunit antigens reduce adverse effects in high risk individuals. However, vaccine antigens are often poor immunogens when administered alone. Adjuvants represent a good strategy to overcome such hurdles, indeed they are able to: enhance the immune response; allow antigens sparing; accelerate the specific immune response; and increase vaccine efficacy in vulnerable groups such as newborns, elderly or immuno-compromised people. However, due to safety concerns and adverse reactions, there are only a few adjuvants approved for use in humans. Moreover, in practice current adjuvants sometimes fail to confer adequate stimulation. Hence, there is an imperative need to develop novel adjuvants that overcome the limitations of the currently available licensed adjuvants. Results: We developed a computational framework that provides a complete pipeline capable of predicting the best citrus-derived adjuvants for enhancing the immune system response using, as a target disease model, influenza A infection. In silico simulations suggested a good immune efficacy of specific citrus-derived adjuvant (Beta Sitosterol) that was then confirmed in vivo.Vaccines are the most effective and cost-efficient means to prevent infectious diseases. Nowadays the approaches to develop novel and safer vaccines require the use of well-characterized antigens, such as purified proteins, peptides or carbohydrates. Unfortunately, often, these so-called subunit antigens are poor immunogens when administered alone. Therefore, additional adjuvants are required to potentiate the immune response. Adjuvants can be used for various purposes: (i) to enhance, accelerate or prolong the immunogenicity of highly purified or recombinant antigens; (ii) to reduce the antigen dose or the number of immunizations needed for protective immunity; (iii) to improve the efficacy of vaccines in high risk population such as newborns, elderly or immuno-compromised people; (iv) as antigen delivery systems for the uptake of antigens by the mucosa; and/or (v) to protect the antigens from degradation (depot effect). Adjuvants may also have significant effects on the nature of the immune responses, and can tilt the immune system in favor of T helper 1 (Th1) or T helper 2 (Th2) type response. Adjuvants can be generally classified into two groups. The first group is composed of delivery vehicles that are used to manage the storage, releasing and presentation of vaccine antigens to the immune system. This group includes mineral salts, emulsions, liposomes and virosomes. The second group is composed of immunostimulants. Immunostimulants are compounds that aim to improve the immune responses to specific vaccine antigens by stimulating the releasing of cytokines through various mechanisms (i.e. MHC molecules, costimulatory signals or intracellular signaling pathways). In this group, it is possible to find Toll-like receptor (TLR) agonists, cytokines and saponins . The first adjuvant activity was discovered empirically in 1926 with diphtheria toxoid absorbed to alum . Since then, despite several decades of research, aluminium-based mineral salts (alum) remains the most used and approved adjuvant for human vaccines . Alum has a good track record of safety and it has been considered the adjuvant of choice for vaccination against infections that can be prevented by antibody responses, and as such it has been widely and successfully used in many licensed vaccines. However, some limitations of alum are also well known. Alum fails to confer adequate increase of antibody response to small peptides as well as certain vaccines, such as typhoid fever and influenza vaccines. Notably, alum is known to be a poor adjuvant for induction of cytotoxic T cell immunity and Th1 responses, which are required to combat several life-threatening infections . There is, then, an urgent need to develop novel adjuvants to support the development of vaccines against pathogens that have been so far refractory to the traditional vaccination strategies, to address effective vaccines against unmet medical need. In particular, the need of new adjuvants capable of boosting the immune responses of individuals with a lower or compromised immune system response, such as the elderly and immuno-compromised populations, represents a major challenge of our times. Although a lot of effort has focused on the development of new adjuvants, which include mineral salts, detoxified toxins, lipopeptides, emulsions, cytokines, polysaccharides and nucleic acids, very few are presently approved for human use. There are in fact many issues that hinder the development of new adjuvants, including the development of local or systemic side effects. If the most common local reactions to adjuvants include pain, injection site necrosis, swelling, granulomas, lymphadenopathy, ulcers and abscesses, the most common systemic side-effects are represented by nausea, arthritis, fever, eosinophilia, uveitis, anaphylaxis, immunosuppression or autoimmune diseases . Even alum is not free from side effects such as fever and muscle soreness. Moreover, difficulty of manufacture, poor stability and high production costs represent other unresolved issues of the adjuvant development pipeline. A deep scientific understanding of novel adjuvants is indeed compulsory to set up the required nonclinical safety testing programs, and even more testing programs are in general required for synthetic, nonhuman, derivatives of toxic compounds and protein-based adjuvants. Accumulating evidence suggests that selected naturally derived components (such as, e.g. flavonoids and vitamins) collectively referred to as nutritive adjuvants have immunomodulating properties . Consequently, a good starting point for the development of new and potentially effective adjuvants may to adopt naturally derived products, and their use may also lead to reduced toxicity and faster development. There are many biotechnological methodologies for evaluating the efficacy of potential adjuvants, ranging from in vitro to in vivo techniques. Such techniques have often been coupled with the use of in silico techniques to speed up the identification of novel candidate adjuvants. However, a complete pipeline encompassing initial selection (based on literature searches or in vitro studies), in silico evaluations at the molecular and cellular level, and in vivo trials, has yet to be developed. The combination of in silico, in vitro and in vivo studies organized in a rationale manner at both molecular, cellular and systemic scales may represent major advance in the identification of potential novel adjuvants. In this article, we present a computational framework that connects and integrates an in silico molecular evaluation, based on the virtual screening technique, with an ad hoc agent-based simulator to search and predict the best citrus-derived adjuvants able to enhance the immune system response. As a target disease model, we chose influenza A, using, as a candidate vaccine, the influenza A virosome. Finally, the predictions made by the simulation framework were validated in vivo.The database of ligands for the virtual screenings was built from the molecules known in the literature to be found in orange fruit extracts, and their 3D structures were downloaded from PubChem, or built manually when not available. Moreover, to consider the possibility of finding ligands not yet identified or present in very low quantities in extracts, the database was merged with the molecules included in Aritas flavonoid library that were previously converted to 3D . So, the final library consists of 6893 molecules in a Microsoft Access database. The structure-based virtual screening was carried out using the PLANTS software , defining a sphere of 12 A radius centered on the LPS barycentre in its crystallographic pose and using PLP as the scoring function. Betasitosterol, Linoleic Acid Ethyl Ester and Hesperidin were selected among the best ranked score candidate adjuvants because, as already detailed in Section 2.1, we found evidences of immune, we present the total IgG, IgG1 and IgG2a levels obtained at day 35. According to the in silico predictions, the best adjuvant is represented by Beta-Sitosterol, which is capable of promoting a very strong humoral response when administered in conjunction with the virosome. A lower immune system response is also obtained by using hesperidin as the adjuvant, whereas the administration of linoleic acid did not bring any significant improvement in respect to the virosome administration only. In, we show the temporal evolution of IgG dynamics for virosome combined with Hesperidin (B), Beta-Sitosterol (C), Linoleic Acid (D) and virosome only (E). In silico simulations show that the administration of Linoleic Acid (D) seems to initially have a detrimental effect in respect to the administration of the virosome only (E). However, after the second immunization (day 21), a somewhat stronger immune response is capable of filling the gap between the two treatments, as highlighted by the behavior of IgG1 antibodies. Interestingly, both the administration of Hesperidin (B) and Beta-Sitosterol (C) are able to elicit a very strong first response but, as showed by IgG1 temporal dynamics, only the latter is able to improve the immune response after the second immunization, whereas the former partially loses its efficacy. We also report the dynamics of IgM titers; however, these levels were not measured in in vivo experiments. Hence, we used the same parameter values as in our previous works without tuning them. From a qualitative point of view, the low concentration of IgM may be in agreement with the general immunology literature. . In silico predictions have then been tested in vivo according to the procedure described in Section 2.6. In, we show the IgG levels obtained in vivo at day 35. From a comparison of the in vivo and in silico experiments (Figs 4 and 5) it is possible to confirm that the simulator is clearly able to capture the complexity of the problem by predicting Beta-Sitosterol as the best adjuvant of the pool. The predicted Hesperidin effects seem to be slightly over estimated. However, the in vivo experiment confirms that the use of Hesperidin as adjuvant has a positive effect in comparison to the administration of the virsome only, even if with less efficacy. Finally, as showed by the in silico predictions, the use of Linoleic Acid is useless for promoting the immunization. Indeed, the in vivo results show that it negatively influences the effects of the immune; the second group (B) is treated with the influenza A virosome in conjunction with Hesperidin; the third group (C) is treated with the influenza A virosome in conjunction with beta sitosterol; the fourth group (D) is treated with the influenza A virosome in conjunction with linoleic acid; the fifth group (E) is treated with the influenza A virosome only. The levels of IgG, IgG1 and IgG2a are shown at day 35. Adjuvants dosage was of 1lg, administered at day 0 and 21. The experiments last 40 days. In vivo trials confirmed the predictions made by the in silico simulation framework. In silico influenza-specific antibody titres. Five groups of 50 in silico mice were simulated. The first group (A) has no treatment (placebo); the second group (B) is treated with the influenza A virosome in conjunction with Hesperidin; the third group (C) is treated with the influenza A virosome in conjunction with beta sitosterol; the fourth group (D) is treated with the influenza A virosome in conjunction with linoleic acid; the fifth group (E) is treated with the influenza A virosome only. The levels of IgG, IgG1 and IgG2a are shown at day 35. Adjuvants plus virosome and virosome alone dosage were of 1lg, administered at day 0 and 21. The in silico experiments last 40 daysPredicting the best citrus-derived adjuvantsresponse. This was also partially highlighted by the SFA simulator, but only at the time of the first immunization. 
