Data and text mining Chembench: a cheminformatics workbench Motivation: Advances in the field of cheminformatics have been hindered by a lack of freely available tools. We have created Chembench, a publicly available cheminformatics portal for analyzing experimental chemical structureactivity data. Chembench provides a broad range of tools for data visualization and embeds a rigorous workflow for creating and validating predictive Quantitative StructureActivity Relationship models and using them for virtual screening of chemical libraries to prioritize the compound selection for drug discovery and/or chemical safety assessment. Availability: Freely accessible at: http://chembench.Within the last decade, cheminformatics has emerged as a burgeoning discipline combining computational, statistical and informational methodologies with key concepts in chemistry and biology . Cheminformatics addresses the fundamental problem of structureactivity (property) relationships as applied to many areas of chemical and biological research, providing the ability to use models for imputation of target activities or properties of untested compounds. Opportunities for cheminformatics research have grown significantly with the advent of parallel chemical synthesis and high-throughput screening and publicly available data from projects such as the Molecular Libraries Initiative . For instance, PubChem (http://pubchem.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/) currently contains nearly 27 million chemical compound records; almost one million of these have been tested in over 2600 bioassays with nearly 300 000 found active. Many other similarly structured databases have emerged recently , providing a corpus of data rivaling the size and complexity of biological databases that established the need for bioinformatics. Despite the abundance of databases of biologically active compounds in the public domain, the data remain largely underexplored because of the dearth of public domain tools for data analysis. Along with other recently emerging tools and toolkits such as CDK and OCHEM (http://ochem.eu/), Chembench is poised to advance experimental research in chemical genomics, drug discovery and chemical safety assessment. To whom correspondence should be addressed.Chembench supports the following cheminformatics data analysis tasks structured as modules. Each module can be used independently or as part of an integrated study design. @BULLET Dataset Creation: Chembench allows users to upload, store and standardize a set of chemical structures. To enable the QSAR modeling of a dataset, activity data for each compound must also be provided. Available descriptors are generated for each compound upon upload. An external set to validate models can be selected manually or automatically. @BULLET Dataset Visualization: Several tools are available. The user can view the chemical structures, examine the distribution of activities, and generate a structureactivity heat map, using either Tanimoto similarity or Mahalanobis distance measure , to check for obvious relationships between global compound similarity and activity. @BULLET Modeling: The modeling function allows the user to select a modeling dataset (either one of his uploaded datasets or a provided benchmark set) and build an ensemble of statistically validated models (i.e. a predictor) of the target property. Chembench currently supports model building with kNN and random forest techniques; support vector machines are currently under development. As listed in Section 2, several commercial packages are used for descriptor generation. @BULLET Model Validation: When selecting a completed predictor, the user is provided with the detailed statistics for estimating the 
