CHiCP: a web-based tool for the integrative and interactive visualization of promoter capture Hi-C datasets Promoter capture Hi-C (PCHi-C) allows the genome-wide interrogation of physical interactions between distal DNA regulatory elements and gene promoters in multiple tissue contexts. Visual integration of the resultant chromosome interaction maps with other sources of genomic annotations can provide insight into underlying regulatory mechanisms. We have developed Capture HiC Plotter (CHiCP), a web-based tool that allows interactive exploration of PCHi-C interaction maps and integration with both public and user-defined genomic datasets. Availability and Implementation: CHiCP is freely accessible from www.chicp.org and supports most major HTML5 compliant web browsers. Full source code and installation instructions are available from http://github.com/D-I-L/django-chicp.A large majority of single nucleotide variations (SNVs) associated with human disease lie outside of known coding regions and are enriched in DNase I hypersensitive regions . Promoter capture Hi-C enables the detection of physical chromatin interactions between gene promoter regions and distal DNA gene expression regulatory elements, globally and at high resolution . By integrating with genome-wide association data, it may be possible to gain further insight into the genetic mechanisms underlying a particular trait or disease . However, owing to a dependence on restriction enzymes in the underlying method, defined interactions are based on specific restriction fragment intervals. The resultant genomic interaction maps are therefore complex, as a single promoter fragment can interact with multiple distal restriction fragments of heterogeneous size, and interactions may vary across different tissue contexts. Current genome browsers with capabilities for the visualization of these interactions, such as WashU Epigenome Browser and Ensembl , provide a linear view which can limit a users ability to resolve these complex interaction patterns and how they relate to other genomic features of interest. A circular representation can be helpful in this context, but existing circular viewers, such as J-Circos , CircOS , GView and GenomeD3Plot , are not specifically designed and optimized to allow interactive and integrative visualization of human PCHi-C datasets. CHiCP employs a hybrid approach: users see a circular overview for all interactions for a given SNV, gene or region, with the option to highlight a particular interaction of interest that results in a standard linear view. We demonstrate its functionality by integrating a recent promoter capture Hi-C dataset (with publically available GWAS summary statistics (http://www.immuno base.org), Ensembl gene annotations (The user interface and visualization of CHiCP consists of a search toolbox on the left-hand side of the browser window that allows searching of the configured PCHi-C and association statistics datasets by gene name, Ensembl gene id, Reference SNP (rs) ID or a genomic region (e.g. chr21:16165420-16959712). Tissue context can be altered by using radio buttons labeled with available tissue types followed, in brackets, by the number of significant interactions for that type. Finally, the Association Study drop-down menu allows users to integrate either public or private genetic association summary statistics. The data visualization is split into three panels, a central navigation panel showing a circularized overview of interactions and annotations for current search term and two right-hand detail panels. From the centre of the circular plot, matching interactions from the selected tissue context are shown as coloured arcs connecting restriction fragments . Moving outwards, association summary statistics are shown in a circularized Manhattan plot, by default genome-wide significant associations (P 5 10 8 ) are shown in green . Genes are coloured according to biotype . Finally, a genomic scale is displayed with red tick marks detailing the positions of restriction enzyme fragments . Clicking on an interaction opens a linear representation of the bait and target regions in separate panels on the right-hand side (, H), with genes shown in canonical format, and outlined exons flagging transcription start sites . Where data are available, extra tracks showing epigenetic states of the cells are shown . Buttons in the top bar allow snapshotting of the current view for the purposes of sharing and figure generation. We used CHiCP to not only validate the findings of Misfud et al. that NRIP1 is a likely causal gene in ulcerative colitis (UC), but additionally, that UC genome-wide significant variants fromoverlap CD34 specific enhancer regions . datasets across multiple tissue types enter the public domain, visualization tools such as ours will have increasing utility in making these results accessible in the context of other relevant genomic annotations. It might also provide a platform for creating a browsable PCHi-C compendium that has the possibility to facilitate the understanding of the role of regulatory variation in human disease in specific tissue contexts. Indeed, future work will examine the feasibility of adding functionality for users to add their own public and private interaction datasets as well as further modifications to allow the general visualization of other sources of high resolution Hi-C data (e.g. enhancer capture). Future user interface improvements might allow for a more exploratory approach at the genome-wide scale. The software is freely available, is implemented using standard open source web components, and thus can be modified to support diverse use cases and datasets both publicly and privately. 
