Sequence analysis Chimera: a Bioconductor package for secondary analysis of fusion products Chimera is a Bioconductor package that organizes, annotates , analyses and validates fusions reported by different fusion detection tools; current implementation can deal with output from bellerophontes, chimeraScan, deFuse, fusionCatcher, FusionFinder, FusionHunter, FusionMap, mapSplice, Rsubread, tophat-fusion and STAR. The core of Chimera is a fusion data structure that can store fusion events detected with any of the aforementioned tools. Fusions are then easily manipulated with standard R functions or through the set of functionalities specifically developed in Chimera with the aim of supporting the user in managing fusions and discriminating false-positive results. Availability and implementation: Chimera is implemented as a Bioconductor package in R. The package and the vignette can beFusion genes, also known as chimeras, have become crucial in the areas of biomarkers and therapeutic targets investigation. The emergence of deep sequencing of the transcriptome has opened many opportunities for the identification of this class of genomic alterations, leading to the discovery of novel chimeric transcripts in cancers. A significant number of bioinformatics algorithms have been developed to detect fusion genes . Recently, we have shown that the performances of such tools can be quite variegated and that their false-positive detection rate can be a critical issue . Most tools detect fusion events in two steps: (i) alignment to a reference genome to detect discordant alignments, and (ii) refinements of fusion candidates with removal of false-positive results. The second step is particularly critical, as each tool implements a different set of filters , and users have limited control on them. As each fusion detection tool has a specific combination of alignment and filtering approaches, results produced by each tool are only partially comparable with the others . Thus, although the combination of the results derived from different tools can increase the number of true fusions detected, it also significantly increases the number of falsepositive results (see Supplementary Material). The Bioconductor package Chimera, reported in this note, provides a common framework to manipulate, analyze and filter fusion events detected by a variety of fusion detection tools. Chimera is based on typical R data structures, which allows its users to take advantage also of the full set of R functionalities.To the best of our knowledge, Chimera is the only available software able to integrate and compare the data produced by different fusion detection tools. Thus, it represents an answer to the lack of standard data structure for fusion data representation. Furthermore, as the combination of results from more than one fusion detection tool enhances the probability to identify fusion events (see Supplementary Material), Chimera provides a common framework to manipulate, filter and prioritize fusion events. Moreover Chimera offers a validation procedure based on de novo assembly (thanks to the GapFiller tool) and enhances fusions annotation through the exploitation of the Oncofuse results. 
