A conditional random fields method for RNA sequence–structure relationship modeling and conformation sampling Accurate tertiary structures are very important for the functional study of non-coding RNA molecules. However, predicting RNA tertiary structures is extremely challenging, because of a large conformation space to be explored and lack of an accurate scoring function differentiating the native structure from decoys. The fragment-based conformation sampling method (e.g. FARNA) bears shortcomings that the limited size of a fragment library makes it infeasible to represent all possible conformations well. A recent dynamic Bayesian network method, BARNACLE, overcomes the issue of fragment assembly. In addition, neither of these methods makes use of sequence information in sampling conformations. Here, we present a new probabilistic graphical model, conditional random fields (CRFs), to model RNA sequencestructure relationship, which enables us to accurately estimate the probability of an RNA conformation from sequence. Coupled with a novel tree-guided sampling scheme, our CRF model is then applied to RNA conformation sampling. Experimental results show that our CRF method can model RNA sequencestructure relationship well and sequence information is important for conformation sampling. Our method, named as TreeFolder, generates a much higher percentage of native-like decoys than FARNA and BARNACLE, although we use the same simple energy function as BARNACLE.RNA has become an important research subject in recent years, and there is an increasing study of non-coding RNA in biology and health. Its growing important role appears in various life domains and processes, including regulating gene expression , interaction with other ligands and stabilizing itself . To elucidate the function of an RNA molecule, it is essential to determine its 3D structure. However, there are a great number of RNA sequences without solved structures. Experimental methods for RNA 3D structure determination are time-consuming, expensive and sometimes technically challenging. By far, there are 29 million RNA molecules with (predicted) secondary structure in the Rfam database , but only 4816 of them have tertiary structures in the nucleotide database . Therefore, we have to fill this large gap by predicting the 3D structure of an RNA using computational methods. To whom correspondence should be addressed.RNA tertiary structure prediction does not gain as much attention as secondary structure prediction (; Eddy and). Both molecular dynamic methods and knowledge-based statistical methods have been proposed to fold RNA molecules. The knowledge-based statistical methods for RNA tertiary structure prediction consist of two major components: an algorithm for conformation sampling and an energy function for differentiating the native structure from decoys. Fragment assembly, a knowledge-based method widely used for protein structure prediction , has been implemented in FARNA for RNA 3D structure prediction. However, this method has a couple of limitations: (i) there is no guarantee that any region of an RNA structure can be accurately covered by structure fragments in the RNA solved structure database, which currently contains only a limited number of non-redundant solved RNA structures; and (ii) sequence information is not employed in FARNA for conformation sampling. MC-Sym is a motif assembly method for RNA 3D structure prediction, which uses a library of nucleotides cyclic motifs (NCM) to construct an RNA structure. MC-Sym has a time complexity exponential with respect to RNA length (i.e. the number of nucleotides), so MC-Sym may not be used to predict the tertiary structure for a very large RNA. As reported in, MC-Sym also fails in the case when the secondary structure of RNA lacks cyclic motifs. Recently,have proposed a probabilistic model (BARNACLE) of RNA conformation space. BARNACLE uses a dynamic Bayesian network (DBN) to model RNA structures, but this DBN method does not take into consideration any sequence information. In addition, BARNACLE models the interdependency between the local conformations of only two adjacent nucleotides, but not of more nucleotides. Other RNA three dimensional structure prediction methods can be found in; Das and Baker (2007);;;;;. This article presents a novel probabilistic method conditional random fields (CRFs) to model RNA sequencestructure relationship. Different from BARNACLEWe use 11 RNAs tested by both BARNACLE and FARNA to benchmark our method TreeFolder. These RNAs contain 12 46 nucleotides and are not homologous to any structures in our training dataset. In case an RNA has multiple NMR structures, we use the first structure in the PDB file as its native structure. It is not very reliable to compare two methods simply using the decoys with the lowest RMSD, since they may be generated by chance and also depend on the number of decoys to be generated. The more decoys are generated, the more likely the lowest-RMSD decoy has lower RMSD from the native. Therefore, a better strategy is to compare the RMSD distributions of decoys. Our TreeFolder generates better decoys than FARNA: we compare FARNA and TreeFolder in terms of the quality of the decoy clustering centroids. Similar to FARNA clustering only on the top 1 decoys with the lowest energy, we run MaxCluster to cluster the top 1 of our decoys with the lowest energy into five clusters. As shown in, TreeFolder can generate decoys with better cluster centroids for nine RNAs: 1a4d, 1esy, 1kka, 1q9a, 1xjr, 1zih, 28sp, 2a43 and 2f88. By the way, even if a significantly smaller number of decoys is generated by us, the lowest RMSD decoys by our TreeFolder for 1a4d, 1zih and 28sp still have smaller RMSD than those by FARNA. Our TreeFolder generates better decoys than BARNACLE:displays the 5 and 25 quantiles of the RMSD distributions for decoys generated by BARNACLE and TreeFolder. The quantiles by BARNACLE are taken from Supplementary Table S4 in. BARNACLE considers only decoys with energy 1, since this kind of decoys are likely to have more correct base pairings. We use exactly the same energy function as BARNACLE, so we also consider only decoys with energy 1 to ensure a fair comparison. We did not generate as many decoys as BARNACLE and thus for some test RNAs we do not have many decoys with energy 1. In this case, we use decoys with energy 2. On the 10 RNAs shown inPage: i107 i102i110Bold numbers indicate better distributions. Columns energy 1 and energy 2 list the number of decoys with energy 1 and 2, respectively. Bps is the number of base pairings.For 10 of the 11 tested RNAs, the model using sequence information yields decoys with much smaller median RMSD. Bold numbers indicate smaller RMSD values. distributions for eight of them: 1esy, 1kka, 1q9a, 1qwa, 1xjr, 1zih, 28sp, 2a43 and 2f88. Sequence information is important for RNA conformation sampling: different from other two state-of-art methods, FARNA and BARNACLE, our TreeFolder makes use of sequence information to significantly improve conformation sampling, as measured by the median RMSD values of decoys. The result is shown in, in which we compare two CRF models: one using sequence to sample conformations and the other not. Without using sequence information, our CRF method is similar to BARNACLE. That is, it models only angle state transitions in a RNA structure. Both CRF models use 50 conformation states. For the CRF model without sequence features, the regularization factor is set to 5 (i.e. = 5). While for the CRF model utilizing sequence information, the regularization factor are set to 5 and 10 (i.e. = 5, = 10). To calculate the median RMSD, for each RNA we generate 300 decoys using the two CRF models. Sampling real-valued angles generates better decoys: in order to show the detailed difference between our TreeFolder and FARNA, we look into the decoys of 1esy. We choose it because that FARNAand TreeFolder yield the largest difference on this RNA among all the 11 tested RNA molecules. As shown in. TreeFolder can generate a much larger percentage of decoys with RMSD 4 than FARNA. We also compute local RMSD of each position in the decoys, which is defined as the RMSD of the segment of four consecutive nucleotides starting with this position, as compared to the native structure. We calculate the correlation between the local RMSD of each position with the global RMSD, as shown in. Among the decoys generated by both FARNA and TreeFolder, the local RMSD at position 13 has the highest correlation with the global RMSD. We also calculate the angle error at each position by Error = vv 0 2 , where v is the angle vector of a decoy at one position and v 0 is the native angle vector at the same position.shows the angle error histograms in three positions 13,Page: i108 i102i110accurate secondary structure prediction. The results for 1l2x and 2a43 from predicted secondary structures are quite bad, since all of their base pairs are contained in a H-type pseudoknot and only half of their base pairs are recovered by CONTRAfold. However, our TreeFolder generates decent conformations for half of the pseudoknot with predicted base pairs, as shown in brackets. In particular, TreeFolder generates decent structures for 2a43 from nucleotides 1 to 14 and for 1l2x from nucleotides 1 to 18, respectively. In order to improve sampling performance on the whole structures of 1l2x and 2a43, we need an energy function like what is used in FARNA to guide the folding simulation. 
