Databases and ontologies C-It: a knowledge database for tissue-enriched genes The development of high-throughput technologies such as DNA microarrays and Serial Analysis of Gene Expression (SAGE) has revolutionized profiling of complex transcriptomes, enabling researchers to determine the transcription level of all known, unknown or putative genes within one experiment. During the last years, numerous genome-wide expression studies were performed to analyze the regulation of genes in different developmental stages, diseases or tissues. Due to the rapidly decreasing costs of nextgeneration sequencing, it is expected that the number of such expression studies will dramatically increase within the next years. Differentially expressed genes identified by these experiments became a starting point to characterize putative functions, interactions and biological roles of identified genes. Recent studies reveal that the number of genes encoded in higher organism (e.g. human) is not as high as initially expected; the current number of protein-coding genes is predicted to be between 20 000 and 25 000 To whom correspondence should be addressed.. Yet, a considerable number of putative genes is still not characterized , which is in part due to the current mode of data processing. Researchers tend to exclude genes with unknown annotations from further analysis even if they show a specific expression profile suggesting a distinct function in the process under examination .assumes that one of the reasons for this bias is caused by the tendency to focus on certain well-known signaling pathways. Such a focus facilitates further evaluation and manipulation of processes under study because of available knowledge and tools. However, there is no doubt that characterization of unknown genes is needed to obtain a comprehensive understanding of the underlying biology in a system-wide manner . C-It is a knowledge database focusing on uncharacterized genes to build a starting point for biologists to study genes with unknown functions. The database implements literature information from the PubMed database to identify genes that lack publication records. Based on the assumption that genes are likely to fulfill important functions when their expression is enriched in a certain tissue, C-It uses the tissue expression information of UniGene expressed sequence tags (EST) profiles to identify tissue-enriched genes. Since evolutionary conservation of gene expression profiles usually indicates important functions of genes in a specific tissue, we implemented our algorithm Databasedependent Gene Selection and Analysis (DGSA;). This algorithm identifies tissue-enriched genes by using EST profiles in all available tissues of organisms that biologists typically use for their research [Mus musculus (mouse), Rattus norvegicuis (rat), Gallus gallus (chicken) and Danio rerio (zebrafish)] as well as human (Homo sapiens). C-It combines microarray and SAGE data to give users integrated access to comprehensive transcriptional profiles. Furthermore, C-It is linked with a custom version of the exon array analyzer (EAA;) to allow tissue-enriched alternative splicing analysis.Despite major attempts to understand the cellular function of genes in the heart a large number of heart-enriched genes exist, for which no specific function has been assigned . To determine the total number of uncharacterized genes,The number of protein-coding genes for each organism based on the NCBI database. we utilized the gene2pubmed dataset and found that 26 of the human protein-coding genes in the NCBI Entrez database have no publication in PubMed. Another recently published study yielded a slightly higher number of genes without publication using a similar approach . Reduction of stringency criteria by three publications per gene increases the proportion of uncharacterized genes to over 41 . In other words: a significant number of all protein-coding genes are only poorly characterized, which emphasizes the need to develop new tools for further analysis. Construction of C-It was based on EST expression profiles from the UniGene database, which were used to identify tissueenriched genes employing our previously introduced DGSA to all available tissues. We included the expression profiles of human, mouse and rat as well as the more distantly related organisms, chicken and zebrafish, into C-It. By utilizing HomoloGene, C-It displays evolutionary-conserved, tissueenriched genes in up to four organisms. Expression patterns of genes in functionally similar tissues are often conserved between different organisms, which often indicates that these genes fulfill important biological functions in the respective tissues. Hence, the identification of evolutionary-conserved, tissue-enriched genes serves as an additional filter to exclude false positive (i.e. nonexpressed) genes. In addition, C-It provides the possibility to exclude genes that are expressed in other tissues. This feature can be used, for example, to filter genes that are enriched in two similar tissues. Literature information from the PubMed database provided a measure for uncharacterized genes. A gene with no or only few published articles was defined as uncharacterized, while we assume that the function of a gene mentioned in many articles is known. Of course, this approach cannot rule out that a gene is mentioned in articles without further investigation or has been studied under a synonym not listed in NCBI. However, we reason that this approach usually gives a good estimation of a gene at the level of characterization. In addition to PubMed, we used the Medical Subject Headings (MeSH) classification to identify articles related to a specific tissue. This approach allows a user to filter for genes that are uncharacterized with respect to the tissue of interest. To gain further information on gene expression patterns, largescale transcriptomics studies can be added. Furthermore, precalculated exon array data can be viewed to identify tissue-enriched alternative splicing isoforms. Using this information, it is possible to obtain a comprehensive overview of the expression patterns of uncharacterized genes. All data mentioned above were integrated into C-It for querying by the web interface (seefor allacquired data sources). A simplified overview of the database scheme is shown in. 
