Genome analysis CLEVER: clique-enumerating variant finder Motivation: Next-generation sequencing techniques have facilitated a large-scale analysis of human genetic variation. Despite the advances in sequencing speed, the computational discovery of structural variants is not yet standard. It is likely that many variants have remained undiscovered in most sequenced individuals. Results: Here, we present a novel internal segment size based approach , which organizes all, including concordant, reads into a read alignment graph, where max-cliques represent maximal contradiction-free groups of alignments. A novel algorithm then enumerates all max-cliques and statistically evaluates them for their potential to reflect insertions or deletions. For the first time in the literature, we compare a large range of state-of-the-art approaches using simulated Illumina reads from a fully annotated genome and present relevant performance statistics. We achieve superior performance, in particular , for deletions or insertions (indels) of length 20100 nt. This has been previously identified as a remaining major challenge in structural variation discovery, in particular, for insert size based approaches. In this size range, we even outperform split-read aligners. We achieve competitive results also on biological data, where our method is the only one to make a substantial amount of correct predictions, which, additionally, are disjoint from those by split-read aligners. Availability: CLEVER is open source (GPL) and available fromSeefor performance figures. See also Section E in the Supplementary Material for a further subdivision of the 10050 000 bp part. Boldface numbers designate the best approach, and italic numbers the best insert size based approach (if not the best approach overall). Comparing absolute numbers of true indels in the biological data with the simulated data points out immediately that the vast majority of annotations is2049 bp: CLEVER outperforms all other approaches on the simulated data and is the best insert size based approach also on the biological data. PINDEL achieves best rates on the biological data. Also, CLEVER makes a substantial amount of exclusive calls in all categories. Tables in the Supplementary Material, subsection F.2, points out that 8090 of CLEVERs indel calls come significantly close to a real indel. Further analyses (Supplementary Material, Section H) demonstrate that 30 of CLEVERs false positives are due to misalignments and mapping ambiguities (see External sources of errors below). Obviously many of those extremely close but not truly hitting calls are due to external errors. Breakdancer makes little and highly precise calls at the expense of reduced accuracy in terms of indel breakpoint placement and length (see Supplementary Material, Section G). 5099 bp: Here, CLEVER achieves substantially better recall and more exclusive calls than PINDEL on the biological data. On the simulated data, CLEVER again achieves best overall performance. In contrast to 2049 bp, however, Breakdancer and VH already make significant contributions. Although VH achieves good overall performance, Breakdancer mostly excels in precision. As before, when allowing a certain offset of breakpoints (Supplementary Material, subsection F.2) or when integrating correct alignments (Supplementary Material, Section H), CLEVERs precision substantially rises from 6072 to 7296 across the categories. 10050 000 bp: Also, CLEVER is best while other tools (Breakdancer, HYDRA, VH) also make decisive contributions. This documents that the current challenges for indel discovery are rather in the size range of 20100 bp. Note that none of the tools makes predictions for insertions longer than 250 bp, see Section E in the Supplementary Material. MoDIL: We compared MoDIL with all other tools on Chromosome 1 alone because of the excessive run-time requirements of MoDIL (CLEVER is faster by a factor of $1000). See Supplementary Material, Section I. Overall, MoDIL incurs certain losses in performance with respect to CLEVER across all categories, but outperforms the other insert size based approaches apart from larger indels (!100 bp). It is noteworthy that MoDIL makes a substantial amount of exclusive calls for insertions of 5099 bp. Accuracy of breakpoint and length predictions: See Section G for related numbers. The split-read based approaches outperform the insert size based approaches. Among the latter, CLEVER and GASV are most precise for 2049 and 10050 000 bp. For 5099 bp calls, Breakdancer achieves favorable values. External sources of errors: See Supplementary Material, Section H, for related results and a detailed discussion on to what degree misalignments and multiply mapped reads/alignment hamper computational SV discovery. Conclusion: We have presented a novel internal segment size based approach for discovering indel variation from paired-end read data. In contrast to all previous, whole-genome-applicable approaches, our tool takes all concordant read data into account. We outperform all prior insert size based approaches on indels of sizes 2099 bp and also achieve favorable values for long indels. We outperform the split-read based approaches considered on medium-sized (5099 bp) and larger (!100 bp) indels. In addition, our approach detects a substantial amount of variants missed by all other approaches, in particular, in the smallest size range considered (2049 bp). In conclusion, CLEVER makes substantial contributions to SV discovery, in particular, in the size range of 2099 bp. Our approach builds on two key elements: first, an algorithm that enumerates maximal, statistically contradiction-free ensembles as max-cliques in read alignment graphs in short time and, second, a sound statistical procedure that reliably calls maxcliques that indicate variants. Our approach is generic with respect to choices of variants; max cliques in the read alignment graphs can also reflect other variants such as inversions or translocations. For future work, we are planning to predict inversions and to incorporate split read information as a unifying approach. Conflict of Interest: none declared. 
